# 9781119040392

Advances in Bioceramics
and Porous Ceramics VII
Advances in Bioceramics
and Porous Ceramics VII
A Collection of Papers Presented at the
38th International Conference on
Advanced Ceramics and Composites
January 27–31, 2014
Daytona Beach, Florida
Edited by
Roger Narayan
Paolo Colombo
Volume Editors
Andrew Gyekenyesi
Michael Halbig
Copyright © 2015 by The American Ceramic Society. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN: 978-1-119-04038-5
ISSN: 0196-6219
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Preface
vii
Introduction
ix
BIOCERAMICS
Influence of the Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties 
3
Rheology Behavior 
Y.M.Z. Ahmed, S.M. El-Sheikh, and Z.I. Zaki 
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
13
Leif Hermansson and Jesper Lööf 
Antimicrobial Effects of Formable Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium 
25
Silicate Nanocomposites for Biomedical Applications
Hsin Chen, Dong-Joon Lee, He Zhang, Roland Arnold, and Ching-Chang Ko
Use of Inter-Fibril Spaces among Electrospun Fibrils as Ion-Fixation 
33
and Nano-Crystallization
Yuki Shirosaki, Satoshi Hayakawa, Yuri Nakamura, Hiroki Yoshihara,
Akiyoshi Osaka, and Artemis Stamboulis
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations 
39
G. D. Quinn 
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure 
53
Composed of a Mixture of Silicate (13-93) and Borate (13-93B3) 
Bioactive Glasses
Yifei Gu, Wenhai Huang, and Mohamed N. Rahaman
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow 
65
Hydroxyapatite Microspheres
Mohamed N. Rahaman, Wei Xiao, Yongxing Liu, and B. Sonny Bal
v
Contents
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
81 
A. Cuneyt Tas
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous 
93
Calcium Phosphate (ACP) in a Simple Biomineralization Medium
A. Cuneyt Tas
POROUS CERAMICS
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films 
111
using Nanoindentation and FEM
Zhangwei Chen, Finn Giuliani, and Alan Atkinson 
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
129
Ray S. Fertig III and Seth Nickerson
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for 
141
Window Glazing Applications
Tao Gao, Bjørn Petter Jelle, Arild Gustavsen, and Jianying He
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: The Non-Linear Regime 
151
before Their Catastrophic Failure
Ehsan Rezaei, Giovanni Bianchi,  Alberto Ortona, and Sandro Gianella 
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
165
Hutha Sarma and Steven Ogunwumi
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on 
173
Microstructure of Porous SiC Ceramics Based on In-Situ 
Grain Growth
Katsumi Yoshida, Chin-Chet See, Satoshi Yokoyama, and Toyohiko Yano
Author Index
185
vi
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
This issue contains the proceedings of the “Next Generation Bioceramics” and
“Porous Ceramics: Novel Developments and Applications” symposia of the 38th
International Conference and Exposition on Advanced Ceramics and Composites
(ICACC’14), which was held from January 26-31, 2014 in Daytona Beach, Florida,
USA. 
A rapidly growing area of ceramic science & technology involves the develop-
ment of novel ceramic materials that facilitate the diagnosis and/or treatment of
medical conditions. Bioceramics researchers have recently developed several types
of bioinspired and biomimetic ceramics, which imitate attributes of materials found
in nature. The “Next Generation Bioceramics” symposium addressed several areas
associated with processing, characterization, modeling, and applications of bioce-
ramic materials. Topics covered by the symposium included processing of ad-
vanced bioceramic materials; bioinspired and biomimetic ceramic materials; bio-
mineralization; self-assembly of bioceramic materials; inorganic-organic composite
materials; nanostructured bioceramic materials; mechanical properties of bioceram-
ic materials; in vitro and in vivo characterization of bioceramic materials; bioce-
ramic materials for drug delivery; bioceramic materials for gene delivery; bioce-
ramic materials for sensing; and bioceramic materials for dental applications. This
symposium facilitated numerous productive discussions among various groups in
the bioceramics community, including academic researchers, industrial researchers,
governmental researchers, and graduate students.
There is an increasing need for components possessing designed porosity for
various applications in several key areas such as environmental control, energy, de-
fense and healthcare. In the “Porous Ceramics” symposium, the speakers discussed
how they can tailor the characteristics of the porosity embedded in ceramic parts,
including the total porosity, the average cell size, the cell size distribution, and the
degree of interconnectivity among the cells. Papers on a wide range of topics were
given, such as innovations in processing methods, including automated manufactur-
ing, structure and properties, modeling and novel characterization tools, mechanical
behavior, micro- and meso-porous ceramics, ceramic membranes, and applications
of porous ceramics. The sessions were well attended and there was lively discussion
vii
Preface
after each presentation, confirming the large interest that exists in the ceramics
community, both in academia and in industry, for porous ceramics because of their
unusual characteristics and widespread applicability. 
We would like to thank the staff at The American Ceramic Society, including
but not limited to Greg Geiger, Mark Mecklenborg, Marilyn Stoltz, and Marcia
Stout, for making this proceedings volume possible. We would like to thank Anita
Lekhwani and her colleagues at John Wiley & Sons for their support of this volume.
We would also like to acknowledge the efforts of the authors and reviewers, with-
out whom this volume would have not been possible. We also thank the leadership
of the Engineering Ceramics Division of The American Ceramic Society, including
Andrew Gyekenyesi, Sanjay Mathur, Tatsuki Ohji, Dileep Singh, Mrityunjay
Singh, Sujanto Widjaja, and the 2014 Program Chair, Michael Halbig, for their tire-
less efforts. We hope that this volume becomes a useful resource for academic and
industrial efforts involving porous ceramic materials and bioceramic materials. Fi-
nally, we hope that this volume facilitates advances in ceramic science & technolo-
gy and contributes to the leadership of The American Ceramic Society in these
emerging areas. 
ROGER J. NARAYAN
University of North Carolina and North Carolina State University
PAOLO COLOMBO
Università di Padova (Italy) and The Pennsylvania State University
viii
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
ix
Introduction
This issue of the Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings (CESP) is one of
seven issues published from manuscripts submitted and approved for the proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Advanced Ceramics and Composites
(ICACC), held January 26-31, 2014 in Daytona Beach, Florida. ICACC is the most
prominent international meeting in the area of advanced structural, functional, and
nanoscopic ceramics, composites, and other emerging ceramic materials and tech-
nologies. This prestigious conference has been organized by The American Ceram-
ic Society’s (ACerS) Engineering Ceramics Division (ECD) since 1977. 
The 38th ICACC hosted more than 1,000 attendees from 40 countries and ap-
proximately 800 presentations. The topics ranged from ceramic nanomaterials to
structural reliability of ceramic components which demonstrated the linkage be-
tween materials science developments at the atomic level and macro level structural
applications. Papers addressed material, model, and component development and
investigated the interrelations between the processing, properties, and microstruc-
ture of ceramic materials.
The conference was organized into the following 19 symposia and sessions. 
Symposium 1
Mechanical Behavior and Performance of Ceramics and 
Composites
Symposium 2
Advanced Ceramic Coatings for Structural, Environmental, 
and Functional Applications
Symposium 3
11th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (
SOFC): Materials, Science, and Technology
Symposium 4
Armor Ceramics
Symposium 5
Next Generation Bioceramics and Biocomposites
Symposium 6
Advanced Materials and Technologies for Energy Generation 
and Rechargeable Energy Storage
Symposium 7
8th International Symposium on Nanostructured Materials and
Nanocomposites 
Symposium 8
8th International Symposium on Advanced Processing & 
Manufacturing Technologies for Structural & Multifunctional 
Materials and Systems (APMT), In Honor of Prof. Stuart 
Hampshire
Symposium 9
Porous Ceramics: Novel Developments and Applications
Symposium 10
Virtual Materials (Computational) Design and Ceramic 
Genome
Symposium 11
Advanced Materials and Innovative Processing ideas for the 
Industrial Root Technology
Symposium 12
Materials for Extreme Environments: Ultrahigh Temperature 
Ceramics (UHTCs) and Nanolaminated Ternary Carbides and 
Nitrides (MAX Phases)
Symposium 13
Advanced Ceramics and Composites for Sustainable Nuclear 
Energy and Fusion Energy
Focused Session 1
Geopolymers, Chemically Bonded Ceramics, Eco-friendly 
and Sustainable Materials
Focused Session 2
Advanced Ceramic Materials and Processing for Photonics 
and Energy
Focused Session 3
Rare Earth Oxides for Energy, Optics and Biomedical 
Applications
Focused Session 4
Ion-Transport Membranes
Special Session 
2nd Pacific Rim Engineering Ceramics Summit 
Special Session
3rd Global Young Investigators Forum
The proceedings papers from this conference are published in the below seven
issues of the 2014 CESP; Volume 35, Issues 2-8, as listed below. 
Composites IX, CESP Volume 35, Issue 2 (includes papers from Symposium 1)
papers from Symposium 3)
from Symposium 4)
(includes papers from Symposia 5 and 9)
Multifunctional Materials, CESP Volume 35, Issue 6 (includes papers from 
Symposia 7 and 8)
(includes papers from Symposia 6 and 13)
Volume 35, Issue 8 (includes papers from Symposia 2, 10, 11, and 12 and from 
Focused Sessions 1, 2, 3, and 4); the 3rd Global Pacific Rim Engineering 
Ceramics Summit; and the 3rd Annual Global Young Investigator Forum
The organization of the Daytona Beach meeting and the publication of these pro-
ceedings were possible thanks to the professional staff of ACerS and the tireless
dedication of many ECD members.  We would especially like to express our sincere
thanks to the symposia organizers, session chairs, presenters and conference atten-
x
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
dees, for their efforts and enthusiastic participation in the vibrant and cutting-edge
conference.
ACerS and the ECD invite you to attend the 39th International Conference on
Advanced Ceramics and Composites (http://www.ceramics.org/daytona2015) Janu-
ary 25-30, 2015 in Daytona Beach, Florida. 
To purchase additional CESP issues as well as other ceramic publications, visit
the ACerS-Wiley Publications home page at www.wiley.com/go/ceramics. 
ANDREW GYEKENYESI
Ohio Aerospace Institute, NASA Glenn Research Center, USA
MICHAEL HALBIG
NASA Glenn Research Center, USA
Volume Editors
July 2014
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
xi
Bioceramics
3
INFLUENCE OF THE HYDROXAPATITE POWDER PROPERTIES ON ITS PROPERTIES 
RHEOLOGY BEHAVIOR  
 
Y.M.Z. Ahmedb, S.M. El-Sheikha* and Z.I. Zaki b  
aNano-structured materials Division, bCeramic and Refractory Materials Division. 
Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, CMRDI, P.O. Box: 87 Helwan, 
11421, Helwan, Egypt, selsheikh2001@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT: 
 
One of the key issues involved in successfully achieving HA ceramic body without 
defects using colloidal processing technique, is the preparation of homogeneous and high solid 
loading HA ceramic suspension with suitable rheological properties. This could be achieved not 
only via adjusting the type and amount of the dispersing agent, but also via controlling the 
properties of the HA powder. The maximum solid loading suspension that could be prepared 
from the as received powder was found to be 14 vol%. This value is too low to be successfully 
applied in casting processes. While, the treatment of the as received powder via calcination 
process prior to suspension preparation was found to play a very versatile role. A solid loading of 
57 and 59 vol% would prepare from HA powder calcined at 1000 and 1100oC, respectively with 
applying the optimum amount of sodium polyacrylate dispersant. The suspensions produced 
from the calcined powder was found to have acceptable rheological properties for casting 
processes in terms of low particle interaction, lower number of floc and floc network and higher 
fluidity. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Nowadays, bone tissue engineering is regarded as the most promising approach in 
treating diseased or damaged bone tissue. The challenge in this approach is to develop suitable 
bone scaffold possesses suitable porosity as well as reasonable mechanical properties.1 Among 
the various materials tested in this concern, hydroxyapatite (HA), which shows excellent 
biocompatibility with hard tissue and also with skin and muscle tissues with the fact that it do not 
exhibit any cytotoxic effects is recognized as the most appropriate material for bone tissue 
engineering.2,3 However, the main drawback in the application of HA ceramics is its poor 
mechanical properties and the difficulties in manufacturing parts of complex shapes.4 In recent 
years a large effort has been made to overcome these problems via the trials in developing 
different processing techniques for achieving more reliable bioceramic bodies. Colloidal 
processing technique could be the most promising way for achieving this objective.5 The 
colloidal processing offers the potential to fabricate bulk bioceramic body having a complex 
shape similar to the human bone through careful controlling the initial suspensions.6-8 This 
technique involves a colloidal dispersion of fine powder particles in a liquid medium and their 
consolidation into a homogeneous dense green body with minimum defects (both in number and 
size).9,10 Consequently, the particle dispersion is the limiting factor in this process which 
affecting both rheology and homogeneity of the final produced suspension. The HA suspension 
should have as high as possible solid loading and in the mean time not possesses too low 
viscosity to avoid critical segregation phenomena as well as not too high to avoid air entrapping 
and density gradient defects in the final sintered product. Accordingly, in order to produce well 
dispersed suspension the inter-particle forces should be highly controlled through modification 
of the reactivity at the solid liquid interface.11-13 This could be achieved through promoting inter-
particle repulsion by any or both of the following methods: 1- through controlling the particle 
surface charge either by adjusting the media pH or adsorption of dispersant on the particle 
INFLUENCE OF THE HYDROXYAPATITE POWDER PROPERTIES ON ITS PROPERTIES
RHEOLOGY BEHAVIOR
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
4
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
surface (electrostatic stabilization) and 2- through steric separation of individual particle by 
adsorption of neutral or charged large chain polymers onto the particle surface (steric or 
electrosteric stabilization).14-17 Acrylic based polymers which are dissociated to form negatively 
ionized polyelectrolyte, are commonly used as dispersant for HA suspension providing enhanced 
stability via electrosteric force.18,19 It worthy mentioned that all manuscripts dealt with colloidal 
processing of HA ceramic or studying the flow behavior of slurry prepared from it, a heat 
treatment step for the as received HA powder should be firstly performed. This heat treatment 
step modifies the physical properties of the powder in order to successfully produce high 
concentrated suspensions from it. This means that the type and amount of dispersant as well as 
the pH of the media in not the only controlling factors in developing homogeneous and highly 
concentrated HA suspension. The properties of HA powder in terms of surface area, pore 
volume, and particle size is a highly important factor. Accordingly, in order to prepare 
homogeneous and high solid loading HA suspension both dispersant (type and amount) and 
powder properties should be optimized. To the best of our knowledge, there is no manuscript 
thoroughly investigate in details the effect of changing the powder properties on the rheological 
properties of HA suspension. Herein a trial was made in order to understand how much the 
variation in the properties of HA powder affecting the flow behavior of the final produced 
suspensions. An extensive study on the rheological properties of suspensions produced from both 
as received powder and powder calcined at various temperatures were carried out.  
    
3.1. EXPERIMENTAL 
 
2.1. Materials 
 
Hydroxyapatite powder used in this investigation was delivered from Riedel-de Haen Co. 
(Seelze, Germany). A stock of HA powder was firstly calcined at both 1000 and 1100oC. The 
various properties of both as received and calcined powders were shown in Table. 1. 
 
Table 1. Properties of both as received and calcined HA powder 
 
As received 
powder
Powder calcined at 
1000oC
Powder calcined at 
1100oC
Mean particle size, m 
3.389 
13.2 
16.887 
Surface area, m2/g 
73.867 
5.157 
1.895 
Pore volume, cc/g 
0.119 
0.003 
0.002 
Zeta potential, mev  
-13 
-27 
-36.7 
 
The dispersant applied in this investigation is Acumer 9400 was supplied from The Dow 
Chemical Company, Midland, Michigan, USA. It is a water-soluble sodium salt polymer used to 
disperse and stabilize high-solids mineral slurries. It is anionic dispersant of sodium polyacrylate 
polymer (SPA) of solid content 41-43 wt% with a molecular weight of 3000-4000 g/mole.  
 
2.2. Processing 
 
Suspensions produced from both calcined and as received HA powders are prepared by 
adding the predetermined amount of powder gradually (for obtaining various solid loading 
suspensions). Both dispersant amount and suspension pH are kept constant at 3.6wt% and 11, 
respectively for all produced suspensions. To avoid it’s contributing in affecting the rheological 
properties of the finally produced suspensions. The suspensions are then ball milled in a 
planetary mill for 24 hr using zirconia ball as milling media. The chosen of 24 hr milling time 
was based on the fact that 24 hour is the last time to promote deagglomeration by ball milling.20 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
5
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
On the other hand to avoid grinding of powder during milling the volume of suspension was 
maintained at twice the total volume of the balls.21 After preparation of all suspensions at various 
solid loadings (as received and calcined) it is subject to rheology measurements. 
 
2.2. Characterizations 
 
The particle size distribution and mean particle size (d50) were determined by the laser 
diffraction method (FRITSCH Model ANALYSETTE 22, Idar-Oberstein, Germany). One gram 
of the sample was suspended with 10 ml bi-distilled water, then the produced suspension 
(produced with hand shaking) was employed for measuring size analysis. The specific surface 
area (SBET) as well as the pore volume of the powders was determined by BET method using a 
surface area analyzer (Autosorb-1, Quantachrome Instruments, USA). 
A laser Zetameter ‘Malvern Instruments Model Zetasizer 2000’ was used for zeta potential 
measurements. A 0.1 g of sample was placed in 50 ml Bi-distilled water with pH modifiers; 
having the ionic strength of 2x10-2M NaCl. The suspension was conditioned for 30 h during 
which the pH was adjusted. After shaking, the equilibrium pH was recorded. Then 10 ml of the 
suspension was transferred into a standard cuvette for zeta potential measurement. Suspension 
temperature was maintained at 25oC. Zeta potential was measured as a function of pH (HNO3 
1M and NaOH 1M were used to adjust the pH). Five measurements were taken and the average 
was reported as the measured zeta potential. The isoelectric point (IEP) was identified at the pH 
axis crossing point. The rheological behavior of HA suspensions was determined using a Bohlin 
CVOR controlled stress rheometer (Bohlin Instruments Limited, Gloucester, England) with a 
truncated cone and plate geometry (a cone spindle with a smooth surface that has a diameter of 
60 mm, a cone angle of 4o and a minimum gab width of 0.15 mm have been used for performing 
these measurements). The apparent viscosity and shear stress versus shear rate curves was 
measured for HA suspension of various volume fractions for as received, calcined and that 
containing various volume contents of starches. In stress viscometery mode, the shear stress data 
were acquired as a function of shear rate of an ascending series of discrete steps with a 1 min 
equilibration time at each step. Steady shear measurements were performed at a shear rate of 
0.01 – 100 s-1 by incrementally changing the shear rate and measuring the shear stress after a 
determined equilibration time at each shear rate. The suspensions were presheared at appropriate 
shear rate for 30 s before the measurements to improve the reproducibility. The measurements 
were performed at constant temperature of 26oC, while during measurements the sample was 
covered with stainless steel cover to avoid liquid evaporation. On the other hand, the dynamic 
stress sweep experiments were performed in an oscillatory mode using the same equipment as 
well as the same geometry and same temperature. 
 
3.2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 
3.2.1. Rheological behavior of as received and calcined HA powder suspensions  
 
In order to investigate how much the calcination temperatures affect the rheological 
properties of HA suspension, suspensions produced from calcined HA powder are prepared. The 
HA powder calcined at 1000 and 1100oC were used in preparing suspensions of 14 vol% solid 
loading. This is the highest solid loading produced from the as received HA powder (14 vol%). 
When solid loading was increased to be above 14 vol%, it was difficult to get dispersed 
suspension and actually the produced slurry had a paste like consistency. Figure 1, shows the 
viscosity-shear rate curves for 14 vol% solid loading suspensions produced from as received and 
calcined HA powder. All suspensions show a shear thinning behavior. Whereas, the viscosity 
largely decreases with increasing shear rate. The shear thinning behavior is usually associated 
with the slurry structure. At low shear rate, liquid is immobilized in empty spaces within floc and 
6
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.01
0.1
1
10
Viscosity, Pa.s
Shear rate, Pa
Without heat treatment
Treated at 1000 Deg. C.
Treated at 1100 Deg. C.
floc network. As the shear rate increases, the floc and floc network break down, the entrapped 
liquid is released and a more order structure is formed in the flow direction.22  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Viscosity – Shear rate relationship of suspensions with solid loading of 14 vol% 
 
It is obviously notice that the calcinations of the as received powder enhance to a large extent its 
flow behavior. A large deterioration in the viscosity was noticed when the powder is calcined at 
both 1000 and 1100oC, respectively, in the whole range of shear rate studied. This improvement 
in the rheological behavior is attributed to the large reduction of surface area of the HA powder 
upon calcinations.23 The surface area of the as received powder was found to be about 74 m2/g, 
while, it is largely reduced to ~5, ~2 m2/g for powder calcined at 1000 and 1100oC, respectively 
(Table 1.). Not only that, but also it was found that the as received powder is characterized by 
high pore volume fraction compared to those calcined especially at 1000 and 1100oC (Table 1). 
The high increase in the viscosity of the as received sample is clearly a manifestation of its 
highly porous nature. Effectively, each individual HA particle acts as a “sponge” absorbing 
liquid, and, thereby, increasing the effective solids loading in suspension.24-26 The above 
mentioned results indicating that it is highly important to calcine the HA powder before 
suspension preparation. On the other hand it is possible to prepare homogeneous and high solid 
loading HA suspension only with the using of calcined HA powder. 
 
3.2.2. Effect of solid loading on the rheology of suspension produced from calcined HA powder 
The effect of different solid loading of powders calcined at both 1000 and 1100oC on the 
rheological properties of the produced suspension will be thoroughly investigated. The 
importance of this study is to determine the maximum solid loading of each powder that could be 
used in preparing the highly deflocculated suspension from HA. Different solid loading 
suspensions from both powders calcined at 1000 and 1000oC are prepared. The solid loading is 
varied from 14 to 59 vol%. Figures 2 and 3 show the viscosity – shear rate curves of HA 
suspension prepared from different solid loading of calcined HA powder at 1000 and 1100oC, 
respectively.  The common features of both curves are that the suspension viscosity is increased 
with increasing solid loading as expected. In addition, all suspensions exhibit shear thinning 
behaviors, which could be attributed to the perturbation of the suspension structure by the shear. 
As suggested by Liu et al26, at lower shear rates, the suspension structure is close to equilibrium 
state owing to the dominate effect of the thermal motion over the viscous force. While the shear 
rate increases, the viscous force affects the suspension structure and leads to a shear thinning 
behavior. At a very high shear rate, the viscous force even dominates and the viscosity plateau 
measured the resistance to flow of a suspension with a completely hydrodynamically controlled 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
7
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Shear stress, Pa
Shear rate, 1/s
For 14%
For 34%
For 43%
For 48%
For 57%
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Viscosity, Pa.s
Shear rate, 1/s
For 14%
For 34%
For 43%
For 48%
For 57%
For 59%
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Viscosity, Pa.s
Solid loading, Vol%
For 1100 Deg. C.
For 1000 Deg. C.
structure.27 The increase in suspension viscosity with increasing solid loading is due to the fact 
that with increasing solid loading less liquid (responsible for deflocculating) being available 
between the particles.28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the highest solid loading for powder calcined at 1000 oC was found to be 57 
vol%, beyond this value (at 59 vol%), the produced suspension had a paste like consistency. On 
the other hand it was found that it is possible to prepare 59 vol% from powder calcined at 
1100oC. This means that with increasing calcinations temperature the general properties of the 
calcined powder are enhanced; hence a higher solid loading suspension is being suitable to be 
prepared. The reasons for such behavior could attribute to the fact that powder calcined at 
1100oC having a particle size much larger than that calcined at 1000oC as well as a high negative 
charge on the particle surface is found in powder calcined at 1100oC more than that of 1000oC 
calcined one (Table 1). There is an agreement in the literature that the smaller the particle size, in 
a suspension, the higher the viscosity.29-35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Effect of solid loading of suspensions prepared from different calcined powder on the 
suspension viscosity at high shear rate of 100 s-1.
Fig. 2. Viscosity – Shear rate relationship 
of suspensions prepared from various solid 
loading of 1000oC calcined HA powder.
Fig. 3. Viscosity – Shear rate relationship 
of suspensions prepared from various solid 
loading of 1100oC calcined HA powder.
8
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Viscous Modulus, (G''), pa
Strain, s
For 14%
For 34%
For 43%
For 48%
For 57%
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.0001
0.01
1
100
Elastic Modulus, (G'), Pa
Strain, s.
For 14%
For 34%
For 43%
For 48%
For 57%
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
0.001
0.1
10
Viscous Modulus, (G''), Pa
Strain, s.
For 14%
For 34%
For 43%
For 48%
For 57%
For 59%
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Elastic Modulus, (G'), pa
Strain, s.
For 14%
For 34%
For 43%
For 48%
For 57%
For 59%
This clearly explains the higher viscosity of suspension produced from 1000oC calcined 
powder at any solid loading than that produced from 1100oC calcined one (Fig. 4). In addition, it 
was found that with increasing calcination temperatures the particle surface charge is highly 
increased, which enhance the repulsive force between the suspended particles (Table 1). On the 
other hand, the viscosity of all suspensions with various solid loadings prepared from both 
powders calcined at 1000oC and 1100oC at high shear rate of 100 s-1 are almost < 1 Pa.s (Fig. 4). 
This indicates that all produced suspensions meet the requirements of the casting process.20,27,36 
However, in order to fully characterize the rheological behavior of suspensions produced at 
various solid loading from HA powder calcined at different temperatures, a dynamic stress 
sweep measurement for the produced suspensions were carried out. In these experiments both 
elastic (storage) modulus and viscous (loss) modulus for various solid loading suspensions is 
measured as a function of the stress amplitude. Figures 5 &6 show both viscous and elastic 
modulii as a function of strain for various solid loadings of suspensions produced from HA 
powder calcined at 1000oC, respectively.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Viscous modulus of suspensions 
containing different solid loading of 
1000oC calcined HA powder.
Fig. 6. Elastic modulus of suspensions 
containing different solid loading of 
1000oC calcined HA powder.
Fig. 7. Viscous modulus of suspensions 
containing different solid loading of 
1100oC calcined HA powder.
Fig. 8. Elastic modulus of suspensions 
containing different solid loading of 
1100oC calcined HA powder.
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
9
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Elastic modulus, Pa
Viscous modulus, Pa
Solid loading, Vol%.
Viscous modulus for 1000 Deg. C.
Viscous modulus for 1100 Deg. C.
Elastic modulus for 1000 Deg. C.
Elastic modulus for 1100 Deg. C.
While Figs. 7 & 8 show both viscous and elastic modulii as a function of strain for 
various solid loadings of suspensions produced from HA powder calcined at 1100oC, 
respectively. The measurements show that (for both viscous and elastic modulii) there are two 
regime as stress amplitude is increased. For small stress amplitude, the modulii are independent 
on the strain value, and this defines the linear viscoelastic regime. Once the stress amplitude 
reaches a significant value (depending on the solid loading) the modulii show a sharp decline 
with stress amplitude and this define a shear thinning regime. The decline in storage and loss 
modulii at a certain stress amplitude indicating that the rheology change to liquid like in the 
second regime.37 This feature is found in both samples calcined at 1000 and 1100oC for all 
various solid loading suspensions. On the other hand the other common features in the dynamic 
stress sweep curves for both samples calcined at 1000 and 1100oC that as the solid loading 
increased the value of both modulii is increased. This behavior in increasing the values of both 
modulii with solid loading would be expected due to an increased rigidity of the suspensions as 
the ceramic particles come in closer contacts with each others formed some floc and floc 
networks.38 However, in order to investigate the effect of both calcinations temperature and solid 
loading on both elastic and viscous modulii, the values of both modules were plotted against 
solid loading at constant strain of 0.01 s (Fig. 9). It is clear that both modulii is largely increased 
with increasing solid loading owing to the fact of increasing number of floc and floc network. On 
the other hand with increasing calcinations temperature, it was found that the both modules is 
largely reduced. Not only that but also the value of modulii for 57 vol% suspensions prepared 
from HA calcined at 1000oC is higher than the values of the modulii for even 59 vol% 
suspension produced from HA calcined at 1100oC.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Effect of solid loading of suspensions prepared from HA calcined at 1000 and 1100oC on 
the elastic and viscous modulii 
This is rather confirmed that the increasing calcinations temperature from 1000 to 1100oC 
is largely enhanced the rheological properties of the produced suspensions at all solid loading 
investigated.  
 
 
10
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
CONCLUSION 
 
Calcinations temperature of HA powder plays a very versatile role on the rheological 
behavior of HA suspensions. It is impossible to prepare high solid loading of HA suspension 
from the as received powder, according to the very high surface area as well as the highest pore 
volume characteristics of this powder. The maximum solid loading that could obtained from the 
as received powder is 14 vol%, which is too low to be applied in casting processes. With the 
using of calcined HA powder (both at 1000 and 1100oC) it is possible to prepare high solid 
loading as high as 57 vol% (from powder calcined at 1000oC) and 59 vol% (from powder 
calcined at 1100oC). The suspensions produced from the calcined powder, having acceptable 
rheological properties for casting processes in terms of low particle interaction, lower number of 
floc and floc network and higher fluidity. With exclusion the fact that always suspension 
produced from HA powder calcined at 1100oC is much better in its rheological properties from 
that prepared from HA powder calcined at 1000oC, still suspensions produced from 1000oC 
possesses suitable rheological properties that makes it suitable also for casting processes.  
 
ACKNOWLEDMENT 
           This work was supported by Science & Technology Development Fund (STDF Egypt) 
under Grant no. ID 806.  
 
REFERENCES 
1L.A. Cyster, D.M. Grant, S.M. Howdle, F.R.A.J. Rose, D.J. Irvine, D. Freeman, C.A. 
Scotchford, K.M. Shakesheff, The influence of dispersant concentration on the pore morphology 
of hydroxyapatite ceramics for bone tissue engineering, Biomaterials, 26,  697–702 (2005). 
2L.L. Hench, Bioceramics: From Concept to Clinic, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 74, 1487-1510 (1991). 
3W. Suchanek, M. Yoshimura, Processing and properties of hydroxyapatite-based biomaterials 
for use as hard tissue replacement implants, J Mater Res., 13, 94–117 (1998). 
4B. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Dong, D. Jiang, “Aqueous gel-casting of hydroxyapatite,” 
Materials Science and Engineering: A, 435–436, 198–203 (2006). 
5N. McN. Alford, J.D. Birchall, K. Kendall, High-strength ceramics through colloidal control to 
remove defects, Nature, 330, 51–53 (1987). 
6T. Navizi, E. Salahi, M. Ghafari, I. Mobasherpour, Influence of Tiron concentration on 
dispersability and sintering behaviors of hydroxyapatite in an aqueous system, Ceramics 
International, 36,  1945–1949 (2010). 
7J. Zhang, M. Maeda, N. Kotobuki, M. Hirose, H. Ohgushi, D. Jiang, M. Iwasa, Aqueous 
processing of hydroxyapatite, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 99, 398–404 (2006). 
8J. Zhang, H. Tanaka, F. Ye, D. Jiang, M. Iwasa, Colloidal processing and sintering of 
hydroxyapatite, Materials Chemistry and Physic, 101,  69–76 (2007).  
9N.McN. Alford, J.D. Birchall, K. Kendall, Engineering ceramics — the process problem, Mater. 
Sci. Technol., 2,  329–336 (1986). 
10M.R. Freedman, M.L. Millard, Improved consolidation of silicon carbide, Ceramic Eng. And 
Sci. Proc., 7,  884-892 (1986). 
11F. F. Lange, Powder Processing Science and Technology for Increased Reliability, J. Am. 
Ceram. Soc., 72,  3–15 (1989). 
12R. G. Horn, Surface Forces and Their Action in Ceramic Materials, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 73,  
1117–1135 (1990). 
13W. M. Sigmund, N. S. Bell, and L. Bergstro¨m, Novel Powder-Processing Methods for 
Advanced Ceramics, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 83,  1557–1574 (2000). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
11
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
14A. Roosen, H.K. Bowen, Influence of various consolidation techniques on the green 
microstructure and sintering behavior of alumina powders, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 71, 970–977 
(1988). 
15M. Persson, A. Forsgren, E. Carstrom, L. Kall, B. Kronberg, R. Pompe and R. Carlsson, High 
Tech Ceramics” edited by P. Vincenzini (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1987) p. 623. 
16R. Fries and B. Rand, Materials Science and Technology, A Comprehensive Treatment in 
Processing of Ceramics, Part I edited by R. W. Cahn, P. Hassen and E. J. Kramer, (Vol. edited 
by) R. J. Brook (VCH, Germany, 1996) vol. 17A, Ch. 6. 
17Y. Hirata, Theoretical aspects of colloidal processing, Ceram. Int., 23, 93–98 (1997). 
18J. Cesarano III, I.A. Aksay and A. Bleier, Stability of Aqeous ͣ-Al2O3 Suspensions with 
Poly(methacrylicacid) Polyelectrolyte, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 71, 250-55 (1988). 
19D.H. Napper, The effect of polymers on dispersion properties, edited by Th.F. Tadros 
(Acadimic Press, London, 1982) P. 199. 
20Z. Sadeghian, J.G. Heinrich and F. Moztarzadeh, Influence of powder pre-treatments and 
milling on dispersion ability of aqueous hydroxyapatite-based suspensions, Ceramics 
International, 32, 331–337 (2006). 
21S. Nayak, B.P. Singh, L. Besra, T.K. Chongdar, N. M. Gokhale and S. Bhattacharjee, Aqueous 
Tape Casting Using Organic Binder: A Case Study with YSZ, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 94, 3742-
3747 (2011). 
22R.Z. Legeros and J .P. Leferos, Dense Hydroxyapatite. In An Introduction to Bioceramics, 
Advanced Series in Ceramics, vol. 1, edited by L.L. Hench and J. Wilson (World Scientific, 
Singapore, Republic of Singapore, 1993) p. 139. 
23E.J. Lee, Y.H. Koh, B.H. Yoon, H.E. Kim, H.W. Kim, Highly porous hydroxyapatite 
bioceramics with interconnected pore channels using camphene-based freeze casting, Materials 
Letters, 61, 2270–2273 (2007). 
24S. Padilla, R. Garcia-Carrodeguas and M. Vallet-Regó, Hydroxyapatite suspensions as 
precursors of pieces obtained by gelcasting method, Journal of the European Ceramic Society, 
24,  2223–2232 (2004). 
25Y.Y. Funda, Y. Acar, E. Yurtsever and M. Akinc, Reduction of Viscosity of Alumina 
Nanopowder Aqueous Suspensions by the Addition of Polyalcohols and Saccharides, J. Am. 
Ceram. Soc., 93, 2630–2636 (2010).  
26X. Liu, Y. Huang, J. Yang, Effect of rheological properties of the suspension on the mechanical 
strength of Al2O3–ZrO2 composites prepared by gelcasting, Ceramics International, 28, 159–
164 (2002). 
27X. Xu, Z. Wen, X. Wu, J. Lin, X. Wang, Rheology and chemorheology of aqueous g-LiAlO2 
slurries for gel-casting, Ceramics International, 35, 2191–2195 (2009).  
28L. Wang, W. Sigmund and F. Aldinger, Systematic Approach for Dispersion of Silicon Nitride 
Powder in Organic Media: II, Dispersion of the Powder, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 83, 697–702 
(2000). 
29J.E.J. Bujake, Rheology of concentrated dicalcium phosphate suspensions, J Pharm Sci., 54,  
1599–604 (1965). 
30J.M. Tian, Y. Zhang, X.M. Guo, L.M. Dong, Preparation and characterization of 
hydroxyapatite suspensions for solid free form fabrication, Ceram Int., 28,  299–302 (2002).  
31J.C. Knowles, S. Calcut, G. Georgiou, Characterization of therheological properties and zeta 
potential of a range of hydroxyapatite powders, Biomaterials, 21,  1387–1392 (2000). 
32B.C. Kim, K. Kim, K.S. Kim, Y.S. Kim, Effect of filler particulate size on the rheological 
properties of suspension CaCo3 suspended in a aqueous HEC solution, Polymer Soc Korea, 11,   
158-162 (1987). 
12
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Influence of Hydroxyapatite Powder Properties on Its Properties Rheology Behavior
33H.H. Xu, D.S. Keller, Shear thickening behavior of concentrated calcium carbonate 
suspensions, June 16–19, 2003; Montreal, QC, Canada. p. 275–80. 
34S.M. Olhero, J.M.F. Ferreira, Influence of particle size distribution on rheology and particle 
packing of silica-based suspensions, Powder Tech., 139, 69–75 (2003). 
35F. Garcia, N. LeBolay, C. Frances, Rheological behaviour and related granulometric properties 
of dense aggregated suspensions during an ultrafine comminution process, Powder Tech., 130,  
407–414 (2003). 
36Y. Bao, A.M.R. Senose, M. Almeida, Rheological behavior of aqoues suspensions of 
hydroxyapatite (HAP), J. Material Science: Materials in Medicine, 13, 639-643 (2002). 
37I. Sumita, M. Manga, Suspension rheology under oscillatory shear and its geophysical 
implications, Earth and Planetary Science Letters., 269, 468-477 (2008).  
38E. Adolfsson, Gelcasting of Zirconia Using Agarose, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 89, 1897–1902 
(2006).  
 
13
NANOSTRUCTURAL Ca-ALUMINATE BASED BIOMATERIALS  - AN OVERVIEW 
Leif Hermansson and Jesper Lööf                                                                                                
Doxa AB, SE-75451 Uppsala, Sweden 
ABSTRACT   
           The paper deals with nanostructural chemically bonded bioceramics with Ca-aluminate (CA) 
as main raw material, and which dental applications these bioceramics are suitable for. Due to a low 
solubility product of the phases formed, nanocrystals are easily formed. The nanocrystal size is in 
the range 10-50 nm with an open porosity with a nano-channel width in the range 1-3 nm. General 
properties of CA-based biomaterials due to the nanostructures developed deal mainly with 1) High 
mechanical strength, 2) Reduced porosity, and 3) Complete sealing of contact zones to tissue and 
other biomaterials due to the nanostructural hydration mechanisms.  CA-based biomaterials are 
close in chemistry to apatite, the main chemical constituent in hard tissue. The CA-based materials 
can favourably be produced at body temperatures. Theses biomaterials tolerate moist conditions. 
The hardening can be controlled to avoid shrinkage, and the thermal and electrical properties of 
CA-based materials are close to those of hard tissue. A specific interesting combination of 
properties  is the simultaneous appearing of bioactivity, and bacteriostatic and antibacterial 
properties, as well as reduced microleakage.  More than ten different dental applications have been 
found possible to produce. These deal with dental filling materials, dental luting cements, 
endodontic materials, stabilising materials and as coating materials on other implant materials. 
INTRODUCTION 
          The structures of apatite in hard tissue are designed to meet requirements on the macro, micro 
and nano size levels with regard to the formation and mechanical properties developed. All 
structures are based on nanosize crystals and nanosize inter and intra layers [1,2]. See Table I.  
Table I.   Tooth structure sizes – from mm to nm 
Tooth
structure
Size in mm 
Size in m
Size in nm 
Size in nm 
Whole tooth 
10 
- 
- 
- 
Individual plates 
- 
0.2 
- 
- 
Nanocrystals 
- 
- 
15 
- 
Single crystal within 
a nanocrystal 
- 
- 
- 
1.5 
All hard tissue structures are sensitive to temperature changes. Artificial materials as biomaterials 
can practically only be placed in vivo and formed in-situ, if the temperature and temperature 
increase can be controlled at low levels.   
Biomaterials in general are based on the materials groups metals, polymers and ceramics [3]. 
Typical metallic biomaterials are based on stainless steel, cobolt based alloys and titanium or 
titanium alloys and amalgam alloys. Polymeric biomaterial composites from monomers are based 
on amides, ethylene, propylene, styrene, methacrylates, and/or methyl methacrylates. Biomaterials 
based on ceramics are found within all the classical ceramic families; traditional ceramics, special 
ceramics, glasses, glass-ceramics, coatings and chemically bonded ceramics (CBC). 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
14
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
Chemically Bonded Bioceramics, CBBCs, are mainly found within phosphates, silicates, 
aluminates and sulphates, as well as combinations of these systems [2]. The forming reaction is in 
most cases a hydration process, where the solid part, the original powder, reacts with water.  The 
CBBCs are an important but small part of the whole biomaterials field. In Fig. 1 is presented an 
overview of how the CBBCs can be classified as biomaterials. 
Figure 1.  Classification of Bioceramics 
The chemistry including phases formed and the structures obtained with chemically bonded 
bioceramics in contact with hard tissue, facilitate and improve the connection between the 
biomaterial and biological tissue. In many cases a nano-structural integration occurs. Five or six 
reaction mechanisms have been identified which all contribute to a safe contact zone, chemically 
and physically [4]. 
BODY TEMEPRATURE FORMED BIOMATERIALS 
          Most ceramics are formed at high temperatures through a sintering process. By using 
chemical reactions, the biomaterials in the CBBC-systems, can be produced at low temperatures 
(body temperature), which is attractive from several perspectives: cost, avoidance of temperature 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
15
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
gradients, (thermal stress), dimensional stability and minimal negative effect on the system with 
which the material interacts. Notably is that the hard tissue of bone and teeth (apatite, a  Ca-phos-
phate based material) also is formed via a biological chemical reaction, and close in composition to 
some of the chemically bonded bioceramics,  CBBCs. The discussed Ca-aluminate based  systems 
have in general favourable biocompatible properties. The chemistry of these systems is similar to 
that of the hard tissue found in living organisms. These are based on different types of apatites and 
carbonates.  
Biomaterials which can be formed at body temperatures belong to some of the following materials 
groups; solid solutions of soft or fluid metals (e.g. gold and mercury, amalgams), organic polymers 
formed by condensation (e.g. resins) or cross linking (e.g. glass ionomer cement), and chemically 
bonded ceramics (e.g. Ca-aluminate and Ca-silicate based materials, Ca- and Zn-phosphates, and 
Ca-sulphates). All the chemically bonded bioceramic materials have a similarity in chemistry to that 
of apatite, and these biomaterials can be injected into the hard tissue structure and formed in situ in 
vivo, mainly due to the reaction pattern involving hydration mechanisms. Water reacts with the 
original phase(s) and hydrate(s) are formed.  
PROCESSING AND PROPERTY PROFILE 
          The CBBCs including Ca-aluminate based biomaterials can be produced at low temperatures 
in-situ, in vivo. The chemistry of these systems is similar to that of hard tissue in living organisms. 
The CBBCs easily form nanostructures with crystal sizes similar to those found in hard tissue. Both 
stable and resorbable CBBCs can be produced. The stable phases are found within the CaO-Al2O3-
H2O and CaO-SiO2-H2O systems, while resorbable phases are seen within the CaO-P2O5-H2O
system and within sulphate systems.  
The chemically bonded bioceramics exhibit several properties suitable for in-situ in vivo placement 
in hard tissues. This is based on the chemical, physical and biological features of the biomaterials 
[4, 5-8]. The chemically bonded bioceramics – especially the materials based on phosphates, 
aluminates and silicates – exhibit a general nanostructure related to both the crystals and the 
porosity between the crystals formed.    
Due to a low solubility product of the phases formed, nanocrystals are easily formed, and it is 
difficult to avoid the nanostructural features. The nanocrystal size is often in the range 10-40 nm 
with an open porosity with a nano-channel width in the range 1-3 nm [2, 9]. General properties of 
Ca-aluminate based biomaterials due to the nanostructures developed deal mainly with 
High mechanical strength 
Reduced porosity 
Complete sealing of contact zones to tissue and other biomaterials due to the nanostructural 
hydration mechanisms. 
General properties  for Ca-aluminate based biomaterials  are presented as [2],           
The Ca-aluminate based  biomaterials include apatite, the main chemical constituent in hard 
tissue 
The biomaterials can favorably be produced at body temperatures 
The  biomaterials tolerate moist condition 
16
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
The hardening can be controlled to avoid shrinkage 
The thermal and electrical properties of Ca-aluminate based biomaterialss are close to those 
of hard tissue. 
Additives for chemically bonded bioceramics, CBBCs, including Ca-aluminate based materials [10- 
12] are introduced to promote: 
Early and controlled hardening and hydration 
Controlled microstructure and homogeneity, as well as specific properties related to 
mechanical strength, dimensional stability 
Radiopacity  
Transparency 
Biological related properties including   biocompatibility, bioactivity,  controlled resorption  
and antibacterial properties. 
CHEMICAL ASPECTS 
          The CBBCs can be divided into two main groups; resorbable and stable biomaterials. 
Ca-aluminate based biomaterials and to some extent Ca-silicates are stable materials after 
hydration, and can favorably be used for load-bearing applications. The Ca-phosphates, Ca-
sulphates and Ca-carbonates are known to be resorbable or slowly resorbable when inserted in the 
body, and their main applications are within bone void filling with low mechanical stress upon the 
biomaterial. The resorbable materials are after various time depending on the specific chemical 
composition replaced by new bone tissue. This can start immediately after injection and the material 
can be completely dissolved after months and in some cases after a few years. 
Stable chemically bonded bioceramics 
          The chemistry and phases in the stable CBBs are presented in Fig. 2  [13]. The actual phases, 
using the cement abbreviation system (C=CaO, A=Al2O3, S=SiO2, H=H2O et cetera [14]) are in the 
Ca-aluminate system C3A, C12A7, CA and CA2, and in the Ca-silicate system C3S and C2S.  The 
reactivity of all these phases increases with the content of CaO. When these phases are used as 
biomaterials, precaution must be taken to the hydration reactions, which are exothermic reactions. 
The temperature increase during the setting and initial hardening can be controlled by selection of 
the phases and volumes involved, and by processing agents.  
Figure 2.  The stable chemically bonded ceramic system, 3-component phase diagram 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
17
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
The main reaction involves precipitation of nanocrystals on contact areas and within the injected 
material. Repeated precipitation occurs until the original powder or the water is consumed, resulting 
in closing of cavities, gaps and voids.  This opens up for multipurpose use as a biomaterial in many 
different applications depending on selection of the chemically bonded ceramic system. 
Complementary reactions occur, when the Ca-aluminate or Ca-silicate is in contact with tissue 
containing body liquid. Several mechanisms have been identified, which control how the material is 
integrated onto tissue. These mechanisms affect the integration differently depending on what type 
of tissue the biomaterial is in contact with, and in what state (un-hydrated or hydrated) the 
biomaterial is introduced. 
NANOSTRUCTURE DEVELOPED CHEMICALLY BONDED BIOCERAMICS 
          Chemically bonded ceramics constitute ceramics that are being formed due to chemical 
reactions. Often the precursor material is a ceramic powder (e.g. Ca-silicate or Ca-aluminate), 
which is “activated” in a water-based liquid. A chemical reaction takes place in which the initial 
powder is partly or completely dissolved and new phases precipitate. The precipitated phases are 
composed of species from both the liquid and the precursor powder. The precipitates can be formed 
in situ in vivo, often in the nanoscale due to low solubility of the phases formed. The nanostructural 
chemically bonded bioceramics are especially found within the Ca-phosphate, Ca-aluminate and 
Ca-silicate systems. 
The large pores between the original dissolving precursor powders are filled and the material 
hardens. The dissolution speed and the solubility products of the formed hydrate phases determine 
the nanosize, the setting time and final curing (hardening) of the material. The setting time can be 
controlled by selection of the precursor grain size and/or by addition of accelerating or retarding 
substances. Since the material can be formed from a precursor powder mixed with a liquid, the 
material can be made mouldable simply by controlling the amount of liquid (in relation to the 
powder) and by the possible addition of small amounts of polymers in the liquid. This makes the 
CBBCs useful as injectable biomaterials, where the final biomaterial is formed in-situ in vivo.
The contact zone developed depends on a combination of the above mentioned mechanisms and the 
actual tissue. The latter varies from a cellular-free high content apatite tissue in the case of dental 
enamel, via dentine to a bone structure with cellular and body liquid contact. In contact with body 
liquid apatite is precipitated due to the alkaline systems Ca-aluminate and Ca-silicate. The hydrogen 
phosphates of the body liquid – HPO4
2- and H2PO4
- - are reduced to pure phosphate ions, PO4
3-.
Due to the extremely low solubility product of apatite (pKs = 10-58) precipitation of apatite occurs 
upon the originally precipitated nanocrystal of the main system [15].   
The phase Katoite, Ca3[Al(OH)4]2(OH)4 and Gibbsite, Al(OH)3, are formed in the Ca-aluminate 
system. For Katoite with even the highest solubility of these low-solubility phases, a rough 
calculation shows the easiness of forming nanosize crystals. 
pKs = 22.3 for Katoite, Ca3[Al(OH)4]2(OH)4   
Ion concentration for precipitation is approximately 10  mM  
Approximately 6x1021 molecules/liter for precipitation to occur 
18
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
Actual volume of interest is approximately 103 nm3
Number of molecules at saturation (6x1021 / 1024)  x 103 = 6
Approximately 50-200 ions per 103 nm3  =  
Approximately 5 ions  per 10 nm  
The ions jump into the water-liquid surrounding, and immediately the condition for saturation is 
fulfilled, and precipitation of crystals occurs  
The surface energy of these approximately 1.5 nm molecules is extremely high, and in the hydrate 
systems approximately 1000 molecules in a crystal is necessary to reduce the total surface energy to 
stability at the environmental conditions at body temperature. 
Nanocrystals of an approximate size of 15 nm appear. 
The nanostructures observed in Ca-aluminate and Ca-silicate system confirm a typical size in the 
interval 10-40 nm. Even the tooth structure in details reveals the individual crystals of the size of 
approximately 20 nm [1,16].  Bone ingrowth towards the apatite formed in Ca-aluminate 
biomaterials  allows the new bone structure to come in integrated contact with the biomaterial. The 
transition from tissue to the biomaterial is smooth and intricate [17]. For an experimental Ca-
aluminate based system the ingrowth is shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 3.  TEM-image of the ceramic-bone contact zone in a sheep vertebra, black particles are 
zirconia (a), STEM image of the hydrated area (b) and HRTEM image of the hydrated crystals (c). 
The biomaterials will be in contact with different tissue - enamel, dentine and hard bone tissue and 
soft tissue - as well as other biomaterials contact surfaces. The actual contact zone developed 
depends on a combination of the discussed mechanisms and the surrounding tissue. The latter varies 
from a cellular-free high content apatite tissue in the case of a dental enamel, via dentine to a bone 
structure with cellular and body liquid contact. Both a pure nanostructural, mechanically controlled 
integration, and a chemically induced integration seem plausible.  The figures 4-5 below show the 
nanostructure of phases and porosity formed. 
Figure 4 illustrates the typical nano-size microstructure of the hydrated material with nano-size 
porosity between precipitated nano-size hydrates [16]. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
19
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
Figure 4. Nanostructure of Ca-aluminate hydrates. The pore channels are estimated to be 1-2 
nanometers and the hydrates in the interval 10-40 nm (White bar 10 nm) 
Figure 5 illustrates the integration between the biomaterial and the tissue, in this case dentine.  Even 
in high magnification a complete integration without gaps seems possible [16]. 
Figure 5.  Nanostructural integration of Ca-aluminate based biomaterial with dentine                   
(gray particles in the biomaterial are glass particles) 
NANOSTRUCTURES  AND MECHANICAL STRENGTH 
          Due to reduced porosity based on the huge water uptake ability,  the chemically bonded 
ceramics based on Ca-aluminate , exhibit high strength values [2]. The inherent flexural strength is 
above 100 MP based on measurement of the fracture toughness, which is about 0.7 - 0.8 MPam1/2 
[18]. The actual flexural strength is controlled by external defects introduced during handling and 
injection of the material. The property data for a Ca-aluminate based material - hydrated at 37 
degree C - are presented in Table II. 
Table II.   Mechanical property data of an experimental  dental Ca-aluminate based material  
Property 
Mean value 
Hardness (Hv 100 g)  
120 
Young´s modulus (GPa) 
18 
Compressive strength (MPa) after 28 days 
240 
Flexural strength (MPa) after 7 days 
82 
Weibull modulus, m 
8 
Fracture toughness, MPam1/2
0.75 
Shear bond strength, MPa 
10 
Typicalhydrate
20
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
ADDITIONAL PROPERTY FEATURES OF NANOSTRUCTURAL CHEMICALLY BONDED 
BIOCERAMICS 
          Another important property related to nanostructural chemically bonded materials such as  
Ca-aluminate based materials – and studied in details in two Ph D theses [19-20], is the possibility 
to avoid shrinkage, and to minimize  the dimensional expansion change during hardening - this in 
spite of the fact that formation of a single hydrate always results in shrinkage. However, for 
nanostructures formed in a moist environment, dimensional stability close to zero can be 
established, resulting in microstructures with nanocrystals and nanopores filled with water between 
the nanocrystals.  In contrast to the shrinkage behaviour of many polymer-based biomaterials, the 
Ca-aluminates exhibit a small expansion, 0.1-0.3 linear-% [5]. This is important to avoid tensile 
stress in the contact zone between the biomaterial and tissue, and reduces significantly the risk of 
bacterial infiltration. For the patient an extremely low post-operative sensibility has been found 
[21]. In this context it should also be mentioned the extremely low microleakage for these 
chemically bonded ceramics [22]. Another property related to the nanostructure is the possibility to 
obtain translucent materials [23]. 
NANOSTRUCTURE INCLUDING PHASES AND POROSITY FOR SPECIFIC PROPERTIES 
           The Ca-aluminate cements and to some extent also the Ca-silicate cements exhibit inherent 
properties not so often considered in spite of its importance for high-strength cement materials, 
antibacterial biomaterials, as well as bioactive materials.    The specific interesting combination of 
properties for Ca-aluminate and Ca-silicate systems is the simultaneous appearing of bioactivity, 
and bacteriostatic and antibacterials properties, as well as reduced microleakage. Other properties 
related to the nanostructure is the possibility to obtain translucent materials. Finally, the 
nanoporosity with nanochannels below 5 nm, often in the range 1-3 nm, can be used for controlled 
slow release of medicaments.  The nanochannels surrounding all formed nanosize hydrates will also 
contribute to a pressure relief.  
Bioactivity and antibacterial properties simultaneously 
The seemingly unlikely simultaneous appearance of bioactivity and antibacterial properties of Ca-
aluminate and Ca-silicate based biomaterials is discussed below. 
Bioactivity
In all the three main chemically bonded bioceramic (CBBC) systems Ca-phosphates, Ca-aluminates 
and Ca-silicates bioactivity is observed, and the reason for this can be summarised as follows; 
The chemical similarity between the hydrated phases in CBBCs and the apatite phase in 
hard tissue 
The possibility of obtaining nanostructures in the CBBC systems in the same size range as 
that of apatite crystals in hard tissue 
The phase transformation of katoite into  apatite and gibbsite for the Ca-aluminate based 
system 
The close contact between the biomaterial and hard tissue due to the repeated precipitation 
of nanocrystals upon all surfaces including those of hard tissues. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
21
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
Antibacterial aspects 
The nanostructure including nanoporosity developed in some of the CBBCs systems near complete 
hydration conditions yields some unique properties related to how bacteriostatic and antibacterial 
properties develop in the biomaterial. The nano-porosity can also be used to control release of drugs 
incorporated in the biomaterial. The background to this is that even if the total porosity is low, all 
porosity is open, thus allowing transport of molecules in the nano-porosity channels [24].   
Based on several studies the following general reasons/conditions have been identified that describe 
and to some extent explain the bacteriostatic and even antibacterial features of some CBBC based 
biomaterials. These are summarized in Table III, and will be discussed in some details below. 
Table III.  Conditions contributing to antibacterial features of  CBBC biomaterials 
Condition 
Description 
Comments 
pH 
Acidic or alkaline pH 
interval 
Antibacterial effect 
at pH < 6 and at pH >9 
Encapsulation 
Entrapping of bacteria 
Bacterial growth inhibition 
Surface 
structure 
Fastening 
of 
bacteria 
upon 
the 
structured 
surface 
Bacterial growth inhibition 
F-ion presence 
F-ions act as OH-ions 
Antibacterial effect even at 
neutral conditions 
The surprising finding in studies recently performed [24] show that the bacteriostatic and 
antibacterial properties of the Ca-aluminate biomaterial may not just be related to pH, but also to 
the hydration procedure and the microstructure/nanostructure  obtained.  This also to some extent is 
an answer why highly biocompatible and even bioactive biomaterials can combine apparently 
contradictory features such as biocompatibility, bioactivity and apatite formation and environmental 
friendliness with bacteriostatic and antibacterial properties.  
Encapsulation 
Main reactions in chemically bonded bioceramics involve precipitation of nanocrystals on tissue 
walls, in the material and upon inert fillers, and repeated precipitation until reacting phases are 
consumed resulting in complete cavity/gap/void/ filling.     This reaction will guarantee that the 
nanostructure will be free of large pores, meaning no escape of bacteria. The nanocrystals will 
participate on all walls, within the liquid, and on all inert particles and on bacteria within the 
original volume. The formation of nanocrystals will continue to all voids are filled. The bacteria 
will be totally encapsulated and will be chemically inactivated.  The nanosize hydrates are attached 
to both biological material and other biomaterials.  In Fig. 6 the nanostructural closure of the 
contact zone in a Ca-aluminate based material to a titanium based implant is obvious  [25]. The 
contact zone between the biomaterial and tissue and other implant materials is kept intact as there is 
no shrinkage in the formation of the zone - just a slight expansion. Thus no tensile stresses develop.  
The reason for later opening in contact zones and bacterial invasion - reported in the dental 
literature for polymer composites [26] - is ascribed the shrinkage of these biomaterials.  
22
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
Figure 6. The nanostructure development at the contact zone between a Ti-implant (top)  and a Ca-
aluminate hydrated paste (bottom), HRTEM  (bar = 10 nm) 
Surface structure 
The bacteriostatic and antibacterial properties are in addition to pH-conditions and the 
nanostructural entrapping mechanism also related to the surface structure developed of the hydrated 
biomaterial. The nano-particle/crystal size of hydrates are in the interval 15-40 nm with a 
nanoporosity size of  1-3 nm. The number of pores per square micrometer is at least 500, preferably 
> 1000 [9]. The number of nanopores will thus be extremely high, which will affect the possibility 
of catching and fastening bacteria to the hydrate surface – an analogue to how certain peptides may 
function as antibacterial material due to a structure with nano-size holes within the structure. This 
may also provide a long-term antibacterial activity after the initial hydration.  
OH- and F- ions 
The size of F-ions is almost the same as that of OH-ions, approximately 1.4 Å. It is proposed that 
the antibacterial effect may partly be related to the presence of F-ions coming from slowly 
resorbable additives. These may have the same effect upon the bacteria as a high pH, i.e. a high 
hydroxyl concentration.  The F-containing slowly resorbable glass and the Sr-fluoride may thus 
contribute to the antibacterial features. 
The nanostructure of the Ca-aluminate based materials makes these biomaterials potential also as 
delivery carriers for drugs including antibiotics [24]. The nano-channels surrounding all formed 
nanosize hydrates will also contribute to a pressure relief. Hemacompatibility is concluded for the 
Ca-aluminate hydrated system [2]. 
APPLICATIONS FOR  NANOSTRUCTURAL CHEMICALLY BONDED Ca-ALUMINATE 
BASED BIOMATERIALS 
           The features and benefits of the Ca-aluminate based  biomaterials are summarized in Table 
IV.
Ti-implant
Ca-aluminate hydrates
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
23
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
Table IV. Features and Benefits of the Ca-aluminate based technology platform
Nano-structural integration & apatite 
formation 
No shrinkage 
Integration/stability/strength 
No bonding /dry field  required 
Variable consistency and 
compatibility to other materials 
Moisture tolerant 
Reduced risk of secondary caries 
No or limited post-op sensitivity 
Longevity/durability 
Easy and fast 
Broad spectrum of usage with 
products targeting indication needs 
Environmental friendliness 
The following product areas for nanostructural chemically bonded Ca-aluminate based biomaterials 
have been identified based on experimental material data, pre-clinical studies, pilot studies and on-
going clinical studies;  
Dental Applications:   Dental cements, endodontic products (orthograde and retrograde), sealants, 
restoratives, underfillings, and pastes for augmentation and dental implant coatings.       
Orhopaedic applications:   Percutaneous vertebraplasty, kyphoplasty, implant coating and bone void 
filling.                                                                                                                                                     
Drug delivery carrier applications:  The chemistry allows loading of different medicaments within a 
broad time interval for delivery – from hours to months. 
OUTLOOK 
Third Generation Nanostructural Biomaterials 
For even more biological related nanostructural bioceramics, stem cell produced materials are 
expected. However, a restriction is the time before cells in the biomaterial can be used. That’s why 
combination of nanostructural CBBCs and stem cell activity is likely in the development of these 
third generation biomaterials, especially if load-bearing properties are required. 
For both dental and orthopaedic implants a development of new coatings is foreseen [25]. This is 
related to the concern of perimplantitus.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The author thanks the personnel at Doxa Company, Sweden and the Materials Science 
Department at Uppsala University for valuable input during a two decade period. 
REFERENCES 
1Martin, R.B.) Bone as a ceramic composite material, In Bioceramics, Ed. J.F. Shackelford,       
(Trans Tech Publ.Ltd, Switzerland) (1999) 
2Hermansson, L. Nanostructual chemically bonded Ca-aluminate based biomaterials, in 
BIOMATERIALS – physics and chemistry, Ed R Pignatello, (INTECH Publ.) (2011) 
3Park, J. B. and Lakes R.S. BIOMATERIALS, An Introduction (Springer) (2007) 
4Hermansson, L., Lööf, J., Jarmar, T. Integration mechanisms towards hard tissue of Ca- aluminate 
based biomaterials, Key Eng. Mater., 396-398, pp. 183-186 (2009) 
5Engqvist, H., Edlund, H., Lööf, J., Ottosson, M., Hermansson, L. In vivtro mechanical properties 
of a calcium silicate based bone void filler, Key Eng. Mater. 309-311 pp. 829-832 (2006) 
24
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Nanostructural Ca-Aluminate Based Biomaterials—An Overview
6Pameijer, C. H., Zmener, O., Serrano, S.R. Sealing properties of a calcium aluminate luting agent 
tested by means of a baxterial leakage test, Am. J. Dent. 23 pp. 121-124 (2010) 
7Hermanssson, L. and Kraft, L., H. Chemically Bonded Ceramics as Biomaterials, Key Engineering 
materials, 247 pp. 437-442  (2003)   
8Jarmar,T., Uhlin, T., Höglund, U., Thomsen, P., Hermansson,L., Enqvist, H. Injectable bone 
cements for vertebroplasty studied in sheep vertebrae with electron microscopy, Key Eng. Mater. 
361-363 pp. 873-876 (2008) 
9Hermansson, L., Engqvist, H.,  Gomez-Ortega, G., Abrahamsson, E. and Björklund, K.,. Nanosize 
biomaterials based on Ca-aluminate, Key Eng. Mater. 49, pp. 21-26 (2006) 
10Kraft, L. Ph D Thesis, Uppsala University, Calcium Aluminate Based Cement as Dental 
Restorative Materials (2002) 
11Engqvist, H., Lööf, J., Uppstrom, S., Phaneuf, MW., Jonsson, JC., Hermansson, L., Ahnfelt, N-O., 
Transmittance of a bioceramic calcium aluminate based dental restorative material, J. Biomed. 
Mater. Res. 69, pp. 94-98 (2004) 
12 Lööf, J. et al,  A comparative study of the bioactivity of three materials for dental applications, 
Dental Materials 24, pp. 653-659 (2008), 
13Muan, A, and Osbourne, E.A. Phase equilibria among oxides, Ed (Addison-Wesley, New York) 
(1965)
14Mangabhai, R. J. Calcium Aluminte Cement, Conference Proceedings, (Chapman and Hall) 
(1990)
15Axén, N., Bjurström, L-M., Engqvist, H., Ahnfelt, N-O., Hermansson, L., Zone formation at the 
interface beteween Ca-aluminate cement and bone tissue environment, Proc. Ceramics, Cells and 
Tissue, 9th Annual Meeting, Faenza (2004) 
16Hermansson, L., Engqvist, H, Formation of nano-sized apatite coatings on chemically bonded 
ceramics, Ceramic Transactions, 172, pp. 199-206  (2006) 
17Engqvist, H. et al, Chemical and biological integration of a mouldable bioactive ceramic material 
capable of forming apatite in vivo in teeth, Biomaterials 25, pp. 2781-2787 (2004) 
18 Hermansson, L., Kraft, L., Lindqvist, K., Ahnfelt, N-O., Engqvist, H. Flexural Strength 
Measurement of Ceramic Dental Restorative Materials, Key Engineering Materials, 361-363, pp. 
873-87619 (2008)                                                                                                                               
19Kraft, L. Ph D Thesis, Uppsala University, Calcium Aluminate Based Cement as Dental 
Restorative Materials  (2002)                                                                                                                         
20 Lööf, J. Ph D, Thesis, Calcium-Aluminate as Biomaterial, Uppsala University (2008)                  
21Jefferies, S.R., Appleby, D., Boston, D., et al Clinical performance of a bioactive dental luting 
cement- a prospective clinical pilot study. J Clin Dent 20, pp. 231-237 (2009)                                           
22Pameijer, C. H., Zmener, O., Alvarez Serrano, S., et al, Sealing  properties  of  a  calcium 
aluminate luting agent, Am J Dent 23, pp. 121-124 (2010)                                                                           
23Engqvist, H., Lööf, J., Uppström, S., Phaneuf, M. W., Jonsson, J. C., Hermansson, L., Ahnfeldt,  
N-O., Transmittance of a bioceramic calcium aluminate based dental restorative material, J. 
Biomed.  Mater. Res. Part B: Applied Biomaterials 69 (1) pp. 94-98 (2004)                                              
24Hermansson, L. Aspects of Antibacterial Properties of Nanostructural Calcium Aluminate Based 
Biomaterials, Advanced Ceramics and Composites, ICACC,  Daytona Beach (2012)                                 
25Axén N, Engqvist H, Lööf J, Thomsen P, Hermansson L., In vivo hydrating calcium aluminate 
coatings for anchoring of metal implants in bone. Key Engineering Materials 284-286 pp.831-834 
(2005)                                                                                                                         
26Mjör, I.  et al,  (International Dental Journal, 50 [6], 50 (2000)   
25
ANTIMICROBIAL EFFECTS OF FORMABLE GELATINOUS HYDROXYAPATITE-
CALCIUM SILICATE NANOCOMPOSITES FOR BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS 
Hsin Chen1, Dong-Joon Lee3, He Zhang3, Roland Arnold4, Ching-Chang Ko2,3,*
1. Department of Endodontics, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599 
2. Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599 
3. Dental Research, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599
4. Department of Oral Microbiology, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27514 
* Corresponding author: Ching-Chang Ko; email: Ching-Chang_Ko@unc.edu 
ABSTRACT 
The recently developed GEMOSIL, a nanocomposite material composed of gelatinous 
hydroxyapatite (HAP-GEL) and animosaline by pozzolanic crosslinking, provides a potentially 
improved alternative to current endodontic cements. The mechanical performance of fully dried 
GEMOSIL approximated that of cortical bone. In its pre-set form, the moldable cement 
solidified in approximately 5 minutes when submerged in water, primarily due to the pozzolanic 
crosslinking. The purpose of this study was to test if adding chlorhexidine to Ca(OH)2 during the 
formation of this material could provide enhanced antimicrobial effects. Four zones of inhibition 
were formed using GEMOSIL, GEMOSIL
CHX, Mineral Trioxide Aggregate (MTA; Tulsa 
Dentsply), and Chlorhexidene as a control. Each material was prepared into disc samples (6.2mm 
x 0.85mm; 8 per material). The Enterococcus faecalis and Streptococcus mutans strains were 
cultured at 37
oC under anaerobic conditions. Bacterial suspensions were evenly distributed on a 
blood-agar plate surface. The MTA/GEMOSIL/GEMOSIL
CHX/Chlorhexidine discs were placed 
on the inoculated blood-agar plates which were immediately incubated at 37
oC for 18-24 hours 
under aerobic conditions. Results showed that the Chlorhexidine and GEMOSIL
CHX provided a 
similar antimicrobial effect to Enterococcus faecalis, while GEMOSIL and MTA did not. All 
four materials showed similar effects to Streptococcus mutans. In combination with previous 
reports showing osteogenesis of GEMOSIL, the GEMOSIL
CHX may be applicable to both 
orthopedic and endodontic cements.  
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
26
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
INTRODUCTION
The biomimetic cement, GEMOSIL, consisting of gelatinous hydroxyapatite 
nanocomposite, calcium silica, and calcium hydroxide particles, was developed for orthopedic 
applications by Ko and co-workers (1,2).
The advantages of GEMOSIL include hardening in a moist environment, moderately 
strong compressive strength (94 MPa) after dehydration, and biocompatibility with osteoblasts.  
Upon investigation, its properties appear to match some demands of an ideal endodontic cement 
including 1) good mechanical strength, 2) short setting time in the presence of moisture, 3) 
injectability, 4) absence of dentinal discoloration, 5) bioactive dentinogenesis or osteogenesis, 6) 
antimicrobial activity and 7) sealability.  Currently, mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) is widely 
used as endodontic cement; however, MTA shows tooth/marginal gingiva staining, slow setting 
time, and poor mechanical strength in a moist environment (3,4,5,6).  This has led to the 
development of several new derivatives of MTA (Dentsply Tulsa Dental, Tulsa, OK, 1998), 
although none have significantly improved upon these problems.  
Our previous studies have shown that the working time of GEMOSIL is approximately 1-
3 minutes, and the compressive strength reaches 28 MPa after two hours of setting in water and 
94 MPa after fully dried.  GEMOSIL’s chemical composition has shown the potential for 
effective in vitro osteogenesis and in vivo bone formation (7,8).  All evidence suggests that 
GEMOSIL can be a new addition to existing endodontic cements including MTA and its 
derivatives.  One missing property of GEMOSIL is the antimicrobial effect against common 
microorganisms found in infected root canals.
Chlorhexidine initially was used as a general disinfectant because of its broad 
antibacterial action (9). It was later shown to inhibit dental caries and reduce the formation of 
dental plaque (10). In vitro inhibition studies have shown chlorhexidine to be effective against 
species found in infected root canals such as Enterococcus faecalis (11) and Streptococcus
mutans (12), and because of this, it was introduced as an endodontic irrigant in the early 1960’s 
(10).  Chlorhexidine is increasingly being incorporated into endodontic materials due to its 
ability to increase antimicrobial properties and improve prognosis.
In the present study, we demonstrated that chlorhexidine solution can be incorporated into the 
synthesis of calcium hydroxide, labeled as Ca(OH)2 creation of a chlorhexidene-impregnated 
GEMOSIL (GEMOSIL
CHX). With this newly formed material, we hypothesized that it can 
improve the antimicrobial effect of GEMOSIL.  
Ultimately, the purpose of this in vitro study was to determine if the addition of 0.12% 
chlorhexidine would enhance the antimicrobial activity of GEMOSIL, and to compare the 
antimicrobial activity to the widely used material MTA. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
27
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Incorporation Of Chlorhexidine In Ca(OH)2 For GEMOSIL 
CaCO3 (Alkaline analysis grade, Aldrich, USA) was calcinated to CaO in a furnace at 
1250
oC for 3 hours.  Pure Ca(OH)2 was obtained through the hydration of the calcinated CaO.
The hydration was carried out at 300
oC using 3 times the stoichiometric amount of 0.12% 
chlorhexidine aqueous solution.  The final Ca(OH)2
CHX content was determined by measuring the 
dry weight [120
oC for 3 h]. 
Disc Sample Preparation 
For each GEMOSIL sample, 100 mg of hydroxyapatite-gelatin powder and 200 mg of 
Ca(OH)2 were ground and mixed with 300 ul of 95% enTMOS and 40 ul of PBS.  The mixture 
paste was then pressed into 6.2 mm x 0.85 mm disc samples.  A total of eight discs were made 
in about 15 minutes prior to testing.  
For each MTA sample, two 200 mg packages of grey ProRoot MTA (Tulsa, Dentsply) 
were mixed with sterile water into paste form.  The resultant mixture was made into 6.2mm x 
0.85mm disc samples.  The MTA was given 30 minutes to set due to its increased inclination to 
crack and fracture, which would render it impossible to use.   
For the control, paper discs were immersed in 0.12% chlorhexidine solution right before 
placing them on the agar plate. 
Microorganism 
Microorganisms investigated were Streptococcus mutans and Enterococcus faecalis.  
Both organisms were a stock strain in the Oral Microbiology laboratory, University of North 
Carolina School of Dentistry.
Antimicrobial Assay 
Bacterial sensitivity of each material was evaluated using the following assay – zone of 
inhibition of surface growth.  The materials were tested against Streptococcus mutans and 
Enterococcus faecalis using assays that measured the diffusible inhibition of bacterial growth on 
a blood-agar surface and estimated the antimicrobial activity.  All procedures were performed 
under aseptic conditions.
Agar Diffusion Assay 
Inocula from frozen stock cultures was cultivated in Wilkins-Chalgren (W-C) broth 
(Oxoid Ltd. Basingstoke, Hampshire, England) at 37°C in ambient atmosphere, after being 
screened by Gram-staining to confirm purity.  Loopful inoculations of Streptococcus mutans 
and Enterococcus faecalis were transferred to 10 ml of appropriate broth and incubated at 37 
°C under anaerobic conditions.  Bacterial suspensions were prepared to 0.5 MacFarland 
standard and diluted to a 1:10 concentration with W-C broth.  Two hundred ml of the 1:10 
dilution were then taken and spread-plated using a “hockey stick” on a turntable to ensure 
confluent bacterial distribution on the plates.
28
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
Test specimens were immediately placed on the freshly inoculated agar plates and 
aerobically incubated for 18-24 hours at 37°C.  Each plate contained 7 disc samples - two per 
material and a paper disc soaked with chlorhexidine at the center as the control.  This assay was 
performed in quadruplets.  After 18-24 hours, the diameters of the zone of inhibition of bacterial 
growth around the discs were measured using a caliper by two independent observers.  
The data for each material were subjected to one-way ANOVA to determine if significant 
differences in zones of inhibition occurred between different materials.  Confidence level was set 
at p<0.05. 
In-Vitro Cell Cytotoxicity Testing Through MTS
Since chlorhexidine has an antimicrobial effect, it may also affect normal cell growth.  
MC3T3E1 preosteoblasts were cultured to test in vitro cytotoxicity for the GEMOSIL
CHX coated 
on the 35 mm culture dishes.  The proliferation of the MC3T3-E1 cells on the coated dishes was 
conducted using MTS assay.  The MTS absorbance of each group was measured on day 1, 3, 5, 
7, and 9 respectively at 490 nm using a Plate reader (Biorad, Hercules, CA USA).  The control 
used GEMOSIL.  The higher the absorbance, the more cell growth. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 1 shows photographs of the zones of inhibition for all testing samples.  The data 
for the zones of inhibitions are presented in Table 1 and Table 2.  Figure 2 plots the mean values 
of the zones of inhibition for all materials.  A greater value implies a better antimicrobial effect.  
In control, growth of both microorganisms was inhibited by chlorohexidine.  MTA, GEMOSIL, 
and GEMOSIL
CHX are inhibitory to Streptococcus mutans. In this case, the means of the zones of 
inhibition were 17.70±0.76 mm for MTA, 15.58±1.41 mm for GEMOSIL, 17.08±0.64 mm for 
GEMOSIL
CHX, and 16.45±1.50 mm for CHX 
For Enterococcus faecalis, the means of the zones of inhibition were 0.00±0.00 mm for 
MTA, 0.00±0.00 mm for GEMOSIL,  8.18±0.73 mm for GEMOSIL
CHX, and 9.85±0.47 mm for 
CHX. The data showed no zones of inhibition with MTA and GEMOSIL, compared to 
GEMOSIL
CHX and chlorohexidine, which showed zones of inhibition.  The difference among the 
materials was statistically significant (p<0.05). 
The size of the zone of inhibition of an antibacterial substance depends on a couple 
factors: the toxicity of the substance for the particular microorganism and the diffusibility of the 
substance in the test agar being used.  The diffusibility of the substance is based on whether it is 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic, molecular size and its rate of release from the insoluble matrix in 
which it is bound. Therefore the size of the zone of inhibition may not be entirely due to its 
toxicity to the microorganism.  
It had been shown that MTA has antimicrobial and antifungal effect (13,14).  Several 
investigation reports that MTA has limited antimicrobial effect against some microorganisms 
(facultative/strict anaerobes) (15).  Al-Hezaimi et al evaluated the antimicrobial effect against 
two different kinds of MTA and found that grey MTA demonstrated signi cantly more 
antimicrobial effects than white MTA when present in low concentrations (16). Also, when it 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
29
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
was compared between Enterococcus faecalis and Streptococcus sanguis, Enterococcus faecalis 
requires significant higher MTA concentration for growth inhibition (16).  In our study MTA 
only demonstrated growth inhibition to Streptococcus mutans but not Enterococcus faecalis.
Figure 1. Photographs of the zones of inhibition in Streptococcus mutans (left) and in 
Enterococcus faecalis (right).  In each dish, the upper right: GEMOSIL
CHX, lower right: 
GEMOSIL, left: MTA, and center: chlorhexidine.
Table 1. Zones of inhibitions (diameter/mm) in Streptococcus mutans
Material 
Plate 1 
Plate 2 
Plate 3 
Plate 4 
MTA
17.20±0.01
18.70±0.71
17.70±0.71
17.2±0.01
GEMOSIL
14.20±1.41 
16.70±0.71 
16.70±0.71 
14.70±0.71 
GEMOSILCHX
17.20±0.02
16.70±0.71
17.20±0.00
17.20±1.41
CHX
18.20±0.28 
17.20±0.28 
15.20±0.57 
15.20±0.28 
Table 2. Zones of inhibitions (diameter/mm) in Enterococcus faecalis
Material 
Plate 1 
Plate 2 
Plate 3 
Plate 4 
MTA
0
0
0
0
GEMOSIL
0 
0 
0 
0 
GEMOSILCHX
7.90±0.42
9.20±0.00
7.90±0.42
7.70±0.71
CHX
9.20±0.28 
9.80±0.57 
10.20±0.28 
10.20±0.28 
30
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
In this present study, GEMOSIL demonstrated antimicrobial activity against 
Streptococcus mutans but failed to demonstrate antimicrobial activity against Enterococcus
faecalis (Table 2).   This study also evaluated the effect of antimicrobial activity when 
chlorhexidine was added to the formulation of GEMOSIL (GEMOSIL
CHX). In the case of 
GEMOSIL
CHX, the antimicrobial efficiency against Enterococcus faecalis increased 
significantly (p<0.05).  In comparison with MTA, which is the most widely used endodontic 
cement, GEMOSIL
CHX demonstrated significantly more antimicrobial effects against 
Enterococcus faecalis. Because Enterococcus faecalis is the most common microorganism 
cultured from persisted endodontic infections (17), the growth inhibition demonstrated by 
GEMOSIL
CHX suggests that this newly developed cement may lend itself to certain endodontic 
treatment modalities.  
Figure 2. Plot of the mean values of the zones of inhibition comparing the four groups. The 
greater the value, the better the antimicrobial effect. S. Mutan and E.F. stand for Streptococcus
mutans and Enterococcus faecalis, respectively. 
In vitro cytotoxicity testing showed GEMOSIL
CHX did affect normal cell growth (Figure 
3) which is proportional to the increased level of MTS absorbance. Two-way ANOVA showed 
that the difference was significant for both factors, Day and Material. At the beginning of the 
culture, the chlorhexidine increased cell growth approximately 25% but then decreased around 
25% after day 7.
When testing the viability of pulp cells in the presence of the new cement, the 
preosteoblast culture showed that GEMOSIL
CHX increased cell growth 25% from day 1 to day 5 
but decreased cell growth 25% after the day 5. It was not clear by what mechanisms the material 
affects cell cycles and whether the cells in the preosteoblast cell culture underwent apoptosis in 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
S. Mutans
E. Faecalis
Materials
CHX
GEMOSIL
-CHX
GEMOSIL
MTA
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
31
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
the presence of chlorhexdine. Future investigations on dose effect and cellular mechanisms are 
necessary in order to determine the applicability of this new cement to endodontic treatment.  
Figure 3. MTS absorbance for GEMOSIL and GEMOSIL
CHX, measured on day 1, 3, 5, 7, 
and 9 respectively.
CONCLUSION 
Chlorhexidine-impregnated GEMOSIL appears to provide superior mechanical strength, 
faster setting time, and greater antimicrobial properties than MTA and therefore, may offer a 
better future therapeutic alternative for endodontic cement. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This study was supported, in part, by NIH/NIDCR K08DE018695, R01DE022816 and 
American Association for Endodontics Foundation. 
REFERENCES
1. T-J M. Luo, C.C. Ko, C-K Chiu, J. Llyod, H. Huh. Aminosilane as an effective binder for 
hydroxyapatite-gelatin nanocomposites. J Sol-Gel Sci & Tech 53:459-65. (2010); 
PMCID: PMC3702191. NIHMSID: NIHMS450862 
2. C.C. Ko, T-JM Luo, L. Chi, A. Ma. Hydroxyapatite/gemosil nanocomposite. In Narayan 
R. and Colombo P. eds., Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics: Ceramic 
Engineering and Science Proceedings, Vol. 29, Issue 7: 123-34. (2008) 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
3
5
7
9
GEMOSIL
GEMOSILCHX
Days
32
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Antimicrobial Effects of Gelatinous Hydroxyapatite-Calcium Silicate Nanocomposites
3. T. Mahmoud and P. Masoud. Mineral Trioxide Aggregate: A Comprehensive Literature 
Review—Part I: Chemical, Physical, and Antibacterial Properties. Journal of endodontics 
1 January 2010 (volume 36 issue 1 Pages 16-27 DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2009.09.006)  
4. T. Mahmoud and P. Masoud. Mineral Trioxide Aggregate: A Comprehensive Literature 
Review—Part II: Leakage and Biocompatibility Investigations. Journal of endodontics 1 
February 2010 (volume 36 issue 2 Pages 190-202 DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2009.09.010) 
5. T. Mahmoud and P. Masoud. Mineral Trioxide Aggregate: A Comprehensive Literature 
Review—Part III: Clinical Applications, Drawbacks, and Mechanism of Action. Journal 
of endodontics 1 March 2010 (volume 36 issue 3 Pages 400-413 DOI: 
10.1016/j.joen.2009.09.009)
6.  E.A. Bortoluzzi, G.S. Araújo, T.J.M. Guerreiro, M. Tanomaru-Filho. Marginal gingiva 
discoloration by gray MTA: a case report. J Endod. Mar;33(3):325-7. (2007) Epub 2006 
Nov 22. 
7. C-K Chiu, J. Ferreira, T-J M. Luo, H. Geng, F-C Lin, C.C. Ko. Direct Scaffolding of 
Biomimetic Hydroxyapatite-gelatin Nanocomposites using Aminosilane Cross-linker for 
Bone Regeneration. J Mater Sci: Mater Med. 23(9):2115-2126. (2012) 
PMCID:PMC3509178
8. J.C. Dyke, K.J. Knight, H. Zhou, C-K Chiu, C.C. Ko, W. You. An Investigation of 
Siloxane Cross-linked Hydroxyapatite-Gelatin/Copolymer Composites for Potential 
Orthopedic Applications. J Mater Chem. January 1; 22(43): 22888–22898. (2012) 
PMCID:PMC3489191
9. R.C. Hirst. Chlorhexidine: a review of the literature. Periodontal Abstra 20:52-8. (1972) 
10. R.H. Birch, T.H. Melville. Preliminary sterilization of the endodontic field. Comparison 
of antiseptics. Br Dent J. 111:362-3. (1961) 
11. H Ayhan, N Sultan, M Cirak, M.Z. Ruhi, H. Bodur. Antimicrobial effects of various 
endodontic irrigants on selected microorganisms. Int Endod J;32:00-102. (1999) 
12. J. Gultz, L. Do, R. Boylan, J. Kalm, W. Scherer. Antimicrobial activity of cavity 
disinfectants. Gen Dent. 47:187-90. (1999) 
13. M. Torabinejad, C.U. Hong, T.R. Pitt Ford, J.D. Kettering. Antibacterial effects of some 
root end filling materials. J Endod. 21:403-6 (1995) 
14. S. Al-Nazhan, A. Al-Judai. Evaluation of antifungal activity of mineral trioxide 
aggregate. J Endod. 29:826-7 (2003) 
15. D.C. Miyagak, E.M. de Carvalho, C.R. Robazza, J.K. Chavasko, G.I. Levorato. In vitro 
evaluation of the antimicrobial activity of endodontic sealer. Braz Oral Res. 20:303-6 
(2006)
16. K. Al-Hezami, T.A. Al-Shalan, J. Naghshbandi, S. Oglesby, J.H. Simon, I. Rotstein. 
Antibacterial effect of two mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) preparations against 
Enterococcus faecalis and Streptococcus sanguis in vitro. J Endod. 32:1053-6. (2006) 
17. E. Schafer and K. Bossmann. Antimicrobial efficacy of chlorhexidine and two calcium 
hydroxide formulations against Enterococcus faecalis. J Endod. 31:53-6 (2005) 
33
USE OF INTER-FIBRIL SPACES AMONG ELECTROSPUN FIBRILS AS ION-FIXATION 
AND NANO-CRYSTALLIZATION 
 
 
Yuki Shirosaki 
Frontier Research Academy, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 
Hibikino, Wakamatsu-ku, Kitakyushu 807-0196, Japan 
 
Satoshi Hayakawa, Yuri Nakamura, Hiroki Yoshihara, Akiyoshi Osaka 
Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology 
Okayama University 
Tsushima, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8530, Japan 
 
Artemis Stamboulis 
School of Metallurgy and Materials, University of Birmingham, 
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
When solution of a polymer with some inorganic ions is electrospun, the polymer fibrils will 
be elongated within the spinning direction and those ions are held in the inter-fibril spaces.  When 
those electrospun fibers are calcined, ceramic fibers will be obtained.  The present study has 
attempted to employ such spaces formed in poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) as nano- or micro-reactor 
spaces for precipitation of nano-crystalline particles.  Exposing the spun PVA mats to ammonia 
vapor fixed metal ions in the form of hydroxide and, induced apatitic calcium phosphate crystallites 
when the precursor solution involved calcium and hydrogen orthophosphate ions. 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Electrospinning (e-spinning) is simple and versatile, and hence has a long history1 to fabricate 
threads and fibers. It is employed for fabricating fibers of common ceramics like ferrites, alumina, 
zirconia, and other metal oxides from precursor solutions of polymers and inorganic ions, as 
reviewed by Sigmund et al.2  A similar trend is seen nowadays, too, but in such diverse 
applications as water splitting3, luminescence4, gas sensors5, or multiferroics6.   Materials from 
electrospun fibers in the biomedical applications include anti-chemical warfare agents7 to detoxify 
gases, electrolyte for fuel cells8, or bactericides9. We et al.10 and Dai and Shivkumar11 derived 
apatite fibers from the electrospinning corresponding precursor solutions consisting of PVA and 
sol-gel derived calcium phosphate colloidal sol.  Almost all of those studies employed calcifying 
the polymer components to yield ceramic fibers.  Here we propose to use the inter-fibril spaces in 
the electrospun (e-spun) fibers as the nano- or micro-reactor spaces, and to precipitate or deposit 
inorganic crystalline or non-crystalline nano-sized particles due to post-spinning chemical 
treatments.  The fibrils of the component polymers in the e-spun fibers have been loaded with 
strong tensile force in the course of spinning, and are likely aligned in the longitudinal direction.  
Yet, the fibers would be commonly accepted to involve many crystalline areas as well as disordered 
amorphous ones, where fibrils are folded to form a lamella structure.  When they have such a 
microstructure, the e-spun fibers surely include certain open spaces among the fibrils and crystalline 
areas in which the inorganic or metal ions, present in the precursor solution, are involved.  Those 
ions will be lost from the e-spun fibers when they are in contact with aqueous solutions, but most of 
them should remain in the fibers as hydroxides when the fibers are exposed to ammonia vapor or 
other.  Metal hydroxides may be converted to oxides under hydrothermal conditions like the 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
34
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Use of Inter-Fibril Spaces among Electrospun Fibrils
Bi–Fe–O ferrite systems12, and possibly to layered double hydroxides. 
 
In this study, dilute solution of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) with calcium, orthophosphate 
(HPO4
2-), or ferric ions were electrospun to provide e-spun PVA mats, for which a few post 
treatments such as exposure to ammonia, tetraethoxysilane (TEOS), and glutaraldehyde vapor, and 
soaking in Kokubo's simulated body fluid (SBF)13,14.   
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
The E-spinning system consisted of a syringe pump with a 22G syringe of 0.5 mm in diameter, 
cathode (Al foil covered steel plate of 10 cm-square), and anode (the syringe), 15 cm above the 
cathode where an electric field 22 kV was loaded between those electrodes15.  The pump fed the 
PVA-based precursor solution at a rate of 0.5 ml/h.  For apatite deposition in the e-spun PVA 
fibers, 0.6 mmol/l brushite or dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD)16 was dissolved into 15 ml of 
0.05 mol/l HCl, to which 1.80g (~0.04 mol) PVA (500 in polymerization degree) was added.  
Then, dry calcium chloride was supplementary added to maintain the ratio Ca/P of the solution at 
5/3.  Some of the e-spun mats were placed on a mesh stage in a capped glass box having a small 
loaf of cotton wool with a few droplets of ammonia, glutaraldehyde, or TEOS so that they were 
exposed to the relevant vapor.  The microstructure of the e-spun mats was observed under a 
scanning electron microscope (S4800-325, Hitachi High Technologies, Tokyo, Japan; acceleration: 
5 kV).  X-ray diffraction from the deposited crystals was recorded on an diffractometer 
(X’Pert-ProMPD, PANalytical, Almelo, Netherlands; CuK , 45 kV, 40 mA). 
 
RESULTS 
Apatite crystallization on the exposure to ammonia vapor 
 
Figure 1 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) profiles for the e-spun mats with or without the 
exposure to ammonia vapor, where samples were coded as PCa5P3 and PCa5P3_A80-xh, 
respectively.  The sub-code A80-xh (x: 1 ~ 24) 
represents that the sample was maintained in the 
exposure chamber at 80 °C for 1 ~ 24 h. The strong 
peaks around 20° and 22° were for PVA itself.  
Sample PCa5P3 had no peaks around 25° and 32°in 2 
theta, attributable to apatite though denoted as Ca-P, 
while samples PCa5P3_A80 clearly showed those 
peaks after 1 h exposure.  Thus, the ammonia 
exposure was found critical for the calcium phosphate 
deposition. 
 
Effects of glutaraldehyde cross-link formation on 
apatite deposition in SBF 
 
The cross-link effects were studied for the 
samples provided four sets of post-treatments: 
 
GS: cross-link + SBF 
  
G: cross-link 
  
AGS: ammonia vapor + cross-link + SBF 
 
AG: ammonia vapor + cross-link 
 
Fig. 2(a) represents the XRD profiles for samples 
PCa5P3 subjected to the post-spinning treatments.  
Here, those post treatments were subjected in the 
order that each sub-code appeared; e.g., for AGS, 
A
G
S. Sample with sub-code AG gave the Ca-P 
diffractions as that with A80-xh (x: 1, 2, 24) in Fig. 1.  
It follows that the cross-link by glutaraldehyde should 
Ca-P 
 
PVA 
Fig. 
1 
Calcium 
phosphate 
(apatite) 
deposited in the PVA fibers from 
e-spinning of the precursor solution 
PCa5P3.  See text for the sample code. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
35
Use of Inter-Fibril Spaces among Electrospun Fibrils
not affect the crystallinity of the Ca-P phase.  Further treating sample PCa5P3_AG with SBF even 
increased the diffraction intensity of the Ca-P phase, and decrease in the PVA diffraction intensity.  
When sample PCa5P3 was first cross-linked with glutaraldehyde, DCPD or brushite re-crystallized 
as indicated by the XRD peaks around 28°, 30°, and 32°, which were definitely different in the 
diffraction angle from those of the Ca-P.  Moreover, the profile for sample PCa5P3_GS indicated 
that DCPD remained in the fibers after the soaking in SBF though the XRD intensity of both Ca-P 
phase and PVA decreased a little.  Fig. 2(b) and (c) compare morphology of the e-spun fiber 
samples (b) PCa5P3_GS without Ca-P and (c) PCa5P3_AGS with Ca-P.  
 
Effects of silane (TEOS) coating on the Ca-P deposition 
in SBF 
 
The e-spun PVA mats impregnated with calcium 
and phosphate ions were exposed to TEOS vapor before 
exposure to ammonia.  Then, the fibrils in the fibers 
were cross-linked by exposing the mats to GA vapor, 
and finally the mats were soaked in SBF.  Fig. 3 shows 
the morphology of the fibers of sample PCa5P3_SiAGS 
that were exposed to the vapor of TEOS, ammonia, and 
GA before soaked in SBF.  Sample PCa5P3_SiAG 
exhibited morphology very similar to that of AG, in 
which no Ca-P deposited.  Yet, the XRD peaks of the 
Ca-P phase were only observed for PCa5P3_SiAG and 
SiAGS but none for samples PCa5P3_SiG or SiGS. 
 
DISCUSSION 
Effects of the vapor treatments
10 µm
SiAGS 
Fig. 2 (a) The X-ray diffractions of samples PCa5P3 with the post-treatments AG, AGS, G, and 
GS. No apparent change in the fiber morphology of samples between (b) PCa5P3_GS and (c) 
PCa5P3_AGS. See text for codes AG, AGS, G and GS.  Bar: 5µm 
Fig. 3  Morphology of sample 
PCa5P3_SiAGS, exposed to TEOS 
vapor before the ammonia, GA, and 
SBF treatments:  the Ca-P crystallites 
surrounded the e-spun fibers.    
 
 
 
DCPD
 
 
: PVA 
: Ca-P 
 
 
 
a) 
c) AGS: with Ca-P 
b) GS: No Ca-P 
36
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Use of Inter-Fibril Spaces among Electrospun Fibrils
 
Many physico-chemical changes happen to the precursor solution at the spouting nozzle.  
High tensile loads are loaded to the polymer fibrils while rapid solvent evaporation takes place so 
that the resulted fibers are very thirsty, especially for PVA, though they still keep definite amount 
of water as indicated by the IR bands due to H2O (not shown here).  It is thus probable for volatile 
acid molecules like HCl to get away from the system.  If some could remain in the fibrils, the 
ammonia vapor neutralizes them or even makes the fibrils alkaline.  Such Ca-P phase is only 
precipitated under pH>6.5, according to the solubility vs. pH chart given by Chow17 and Ishikawa18.  
This should be the explanation for the fact that the ammonia treatment stimulated the Ca-P 
deposition, confirmed by Figures 1 and 2. The basicity should induce a reaction similar to that of 
apatite precipitation under basic conditions (Eq. 1).  
  
 
5Ca2+ + 3HPO4
2- + 2OH- 
 Ca5(PO4)3OH + H2O 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
It follows that the ammonia molecules easily go into the PVA fibers.  It is reasonable because one 
of our previous studies15 indicated that silica oligomers derived from hydrolysis of TEOS under 
acidic conditions penetrated into the e-spun PVA fibers, but not the colloidal particles from the 
Stöber and Fink system19.  Since SBF is supersaturated with respect to apatite precipitation, 
increase in the concentration of calcium or orthophosphate ions may stimulate it.  However, 
sample PCa5P3_GS would not induce the Ca-P deposition as confirmed by the XRD for 
PCa5P3_GS in Fig. 2.  Thus, once those calcium and phosphate ions form DCPD, SBF is unable 
to decompose it and convert to apatite.   
 
 
Behavior of glutaraldehyde and the effects of the 
glutaraldehyde cross-link on the Ca-P precipitation and 
microstructure of PVA seem straightforward.  Figure 4 
schematically represents the cross-link by a glutaraldehyde 
molecule to provide open space (the grey area) in the fibrils.  
Fig. 2 indicated that the cross-link squeezed out the calcium 
and phosphate ions to form DCPD (PCa5P3_G) because the 
aldehyde molecules consume the OH groups of the PVA 
fibrils.  The deposition of the Ca-P in PCa5P3_AG or AGS 
thus indicates those component ions remain isolated in sample 
PCa5P3_AG without forming DCPD.  The basic (=alkaline) 
environment created by the exposure to ammonia thus is 
suggested to form calcium hydroxide or stimulate the reaction 
of eq. 1 with which the apatitic Ca-P is directly precipitated.  
The cross-link of glutaraldehyde should hold those crystallites 
within the open spaces of Fig. 4.  Here, only amorphous regions are considered for the cross-link 
formation, but the crystalline areas with pieces of lamella also are likely cross-linked.  Yet, the 
degree of the cross-linking would not be large because the decrease in the XRD for the PVA peaks 
should indicate the degradation of those lamellas into amorphous agglomerates of fibrils or 
decomposing into much smaller pieces of lamella.  The exposure to TEOS vapor, followed by that 
to ammonia vapor, was so effective to induce the Ca-P precipitation.  The vigorous deposition of 
apatite, presented in Fig. 3, is interpreted as follows: the TEOS molecules are small enough to be 
migrated among the fibrils in the as-spun fibers, while they form silica clusters rich in Si-OH as 
confirmed in the sol-gel procedure of TEOS under basic conditions.  Such silanol groups, coupled 
with the basic conditions due to ammonia, are highly inductive to precipitate apatite crystallites, and 
those crystalline particles near the surface will stimulate the crystal growth collecting the calcium 
and phosphate ions from SBF. 
 
Fixation of other ions and molecules in the spaces 
 
Ions and smaller oligomers will be lost when the fiber mats are soaked in a good solvent since 
 
O 
O 
OH 
Cross-link skeleton 
PVA skeleton 
HO 
Fig. 4  A schematic model of the 
glutaraldehyde cross-link and open 
spaces (grey area) to accommodate 
ions and nano-crystallites. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
37
Use of Inter-Fibril Spaces among Electrospun Fibrils
the inter-fibril spaces are large enough for them.  One of the fixation ways is to expose the system 
to ammonia vapor so that the metal ions should form hydroxide clusters.  A preliminary 
experiment was conducted for ferric ions using the same PVA solution.  The pale yellowish tint in 
the precursor solution increased when the e-spun fibers were exposed to the ammonia vapor.  It 
was unfortunate that the concentration could not be raised much in order that e-spinning was 
successfully conducted, and the resultant fibers did not deserve IR detection of increased OH 
species.  Moreover, one may expect the Ca-P crystallites should grow parallel to the spun fibrils 
because they are loaded with strong tensile force at the e-spinning.  It was attempted to observe the 
orientation of those crystallites under a transmission electron microscope, but in vain, probably 
because they were so tiny. 
 
 
CONCLUSIVE REMARKS 
An attempt has been proposed to employ the inter-fibril spaces as a nano- or micro-reactor spaces.  
Cross-linking of PVA fibrils with glutaraldehyde was found to squeeze the calcium and phosphate 
ions to form DCPD but to allow the vapor molecules or the accommodated ions to migrate among 
the fibrils.  The basic conditions due to the exposure to ammonia vapor were essential to control 
the behavior of the metal ions, like the deposition of apatite.  The present results can be extended 
to other precursor systems regardless of polymers or solvents, as far as they can accommodate 
inorganic ions and are permeable with vapors to modify chemical environment in the spun fibrils. 
 
Acknowledgment 
Partial financial support by Challenging Exploratory Research (2013-14), the Japan Society for 
Promotion of Science is gratefully acknowledged.  A part of this study was presented at the 38th 
International Conference and Exposition on Advanced Ceramics and Composites, held in Daytona 
Beach, FL, USA, Jan. 26-31, 2014. 
 
 
REFERENCES  
1A. Formhals, Process and Apparatus for Preparing Artificial Threads, US Patent 1975504, Oct. 2, 
1934. 
2 W. Sigmund, J. Yuh, H. Park, V. Maneeratana, G. Pyrgiotakis, A. Daga, J. Taylor, J. C. Nino, J. 
Am. Ceram. Soc., 89 395-407 (2006). 
3 H. Bai, Z. Liu, D. D. Sun, Facile Fabrication of TiO2/SrTiO3 Composite Nanofibers by 
Electrospinning for High Efficient H2 Generation, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 96, 942–949 (2013). 
4 G. Seeta, R. Raju, J-S. Yu, J-Y. Park, H-C. Jung, B-K. Moon, Photoluminescence and 
Cathodoluminescence Properties of Nanocrystalline Ca2Gd8Si6O26: Sm3+ Phosphors, J. Am. Ceram. 
Soc., 95, 238-242 (2012). 
5 C. Jiang, G. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Li, and K. Shi, Facile Synthesis of SnO2 Nanocrystalline Tubes by 
Electrospinning and Their Fast Response and High Sensitivity to NOx at Room Temperature, Cryst 
Eng Comm, 14, 2739-47 (2012).  
6 S.H. Xie, J. Y. Li, R. Proksch, Y.M. Liu, Y. C. Zhou, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Ou, L. N. Lan, and Y. Qiao, 
Nanocrystalline Multiferroic BiFeO3 Ultrafine Fibers by Sol–Gel Based Electrospinning, Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 93, 222904, 3pp (2008). 
7 R. Ramaseshan and S. Ramakrishna, Zinc Titanate Nanofibers for the Detoxification of Chemical 
Warfare Simulants, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 90 1836–1842 (2007). 
8 C-f. Pan, H. Wu, C. Wang, B. Wang, L. Zhang, Z-d. Cheng, P. Hu, W. Pan, Z-y. Zhou, X. Yang, J. 
Zhu, Nanowire-Based High-Performance ‘‘Micro Fuel Cells’’: One Nanowire, One Fuel Cell, Adv. 
Mater., 20, 1644–1648 (2008) 
9 B. Gao, J. Fu, K. Huo, W. Zhang, Y. Xie, P. K. Chu, Quasi-Aligned Ag–Nb2O5 Nanobelt Arrays 
with Enhanced Photocatalytic and Antibacterial Activities, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 94, 2330–2338 
(2011).  
38
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Use of Inter-Fibril Spaces among Electrospun Fibrils
10 Yiquan Wu, Larry L. Hench, Jing Du, Kwang-Leong Choy and Jingkun Guo, Preparation of 
Hydroxyapatite Fibers by Electrospinning Technique, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 87, 1988-1991 (2004). 
11 X-s. Dai, S. Shivkumar, Electrospinning of PVA-Calcium Phosphate Sol Precursors for the 
Production of Fibrous Hydroxyapatite, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 90, 1412-1419 (2007). 
12 A. Gajovi , S. Šturm, B. Jan ar, A. Šanti , K. Žagar, M. 
eh, The Synthesis of Pure-Phase 
Bismuth Ferrite in the Bi–Fe–O System Under Hydrothermal Conditions without a Mineralizer, J. 
Am. Ceram. Soc., 93, 3173–3179 (2010). 
13 S-B. Cho, K. Nakanishi, T. Kokubo, N. Soga, C. Ohtsuki, T. Nakamura, T. Kitsugi, T. 
Yamamuro, Dependence of Apatite Formation on Silica Gel on Its Structure: Effect of Heat 
Treatment, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 78, 1769-1774 (1995). 
14 T. Kokubo, Hi. Takadama, How useful is SBF in predicting in vivo bone bioactivity?, 
Biomaterials, 27, 2907–2915 (2006). 
15 Y. Shirosaki, H. Yoshihara, S. Chen, M. Blevins, Y. Nakamura, N. Hanagata, S. Hayakawa, A. 
Stamboulis, A. Osaka, “Electrospun poly(vinyl alcohol) as a template of silica micro-fibrous mats”, 
J Ceram Soc Jpn, 120[11], 520-524 (2012). 
16 F. Tamimi, Z. Sheikh, J. Barralet, Dicalcium phosphate cements: Brushite and monetite, Acta 
Biomaterialia, 8, 474–487 (2012) 
17 LC. Chow, Next generation calcium phosphate-based biomaterials, Dent. Mat. J., 28, 1-10 (2009) 
18 K. Ishikawa, Bone substitute fabrication based on dissolution-precipitation reactions, Materials, 3, 
1138-1155 (2010). 
19 W. Stober, A. Fink, Controlled Growth of Monodisperse Silica Spheres in the Micron Size 
Range, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 26, 62-69 (1968). 
 
39
 
FRACTOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF BROKEN CERAMIC DENTAL RESTORATIONS  
G. D. Quinn  
Volpe Research Center 
American Dental Association Foundation 
Stop 854-6, NIST 
Gaithersburg, MD 29899 
 
  
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This presentation shows fractographic analyses of seven fractured ceramic bridges and 
one crown made with modern dental restorative materials.  The overall breakage patterns were 
evaluated and stereoptical and scanning electron microscopy used to find the causes of fracture. 
There were multiple causes of fracture, but faulty restoration design or fabrication laboratory 
faults accounted for most fractures.   Fracture stresses were relatively low. 
         
INTRODUCTION    1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 
 All-ceramic restorations are now being used in increasing numbers in prosthetic 
dentistry.  Crowns are restorations to a single tooth.  Bridges are restorations involving multiple 
teeth and are termed fixed partial dentures (FPDs).  Sometimes restorations break and it is 
important to identify the causes of fracture so that manufacturers, clinicians, and laboratory 
technicians can minimize the incidence of breakage.  Identification of the mechanisms of fracture 
can help researchers can develop clinically relevant testing procedures.  Analysis of ceramic 
restorations can be difficult. Rarely are there fracture mirrors centered on an origin.   
Fractographic analysis is a cumulative learning experience and we have been analyzing as many 
fractured restorations as we can to increase our experience base and to identify the causes of 
fracture.    This is the latest in a series of papers to present case studies on this topic.1-9  Six of the 
cases have not been published previously.   
 
  EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
 
Several fracture cases occurred in vivo, that is, in the patient’s mouth after installation.  
Several occurred during fabrication in the dental laboratory.   All the matching pieces were 
available in some cases, but in others, only one or two critical pieces were retrieved.  
Conventional fractographic analysis techniques with stereoptical and scanning electron 
microscopy were performed in accordance with the Guide to Fractography.10  In some cases the 
fractures were easy to interpret, but in others a systematic approach to analyze a fracture was 
necessary.5 The local directions of crack propagation across the fracture surfaces were 
interpreted utilizing markings such as wake hackle from pore/bubbles in the veneer and twist 
hackle in the framework or veneer ceramics.   Detailed maps of the entire fracture surface were 
made in some instances.   It was possible to back track to an origin site for each case.  Although 
a fracture analysis may require a dozen or even a hundred photographs, only the primary results 
and a few illustrative figures are shown in this manuscript due to space limitations. 
 
RESULTS 
 
The eight case studies, including seven bridges and one crown, are summarized in Table 
1 and analyzed in order below.  Six fractures occurred in vivo and two were in the laboratory. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
40
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
Table 1.  Cases analyzed 
 
Case 
Teeth 
Clinical 
Materiala 
Cause of fracture 
B1 
Posterior bridge 
+ 
Broke in vivo 
2003 
Dentsply-
Ceramco Cercon 
CAM zirconia 
Break in bending at the connector from 
grinding cracks.  
B2 
Training course 
bridge with one 
incisor + 
Broke in the 
lab 
2003 
Dentsply-
Ceramco Cercon 
CAM zirconia 
Broke in the lab during preparation. The 
origin was bubbles and damage in the 
veneer. 
B3 
Training course 
4 unit posterior 
bridge + 
Broke in the 
lab 
2003 
Dentsply-
Ceramco Cercon 
CAM zirconia 
Broke in the lab during preparation. The 
origin was bubbles and damage in the 
veneer. 
B4 
3 unit bridge, 
anterior 
#8 - #10* 
Broke in vivo 
at 4 years, 
2009 
alumina-glass 
composite, Vita 
Inceram alumina? 
Margin initiated crack near connector, 
propagated by hoop stresses    Ref. 9 
B5 
3 unit bridge, 
units European 
#25 - #27  ** 
Broke in vivo 
at 4 years 
2011 
alumna-zirconia 
with glass,  
Vita Inceram AZ? 
Faulty preparation.  The connector was too 
thin but also was cracked during fabrication.  
The crack was sealed by glass.   
B6 
3 unit posterior 
bridge *** 
Broke in vivo  
at 7 weeks 
2011 
Ivoclar/Vivadent  
e.max Press 
lithium disilicate  
Connector fracture from normal loading.  
Origin was a tiny contact damage site in the 
veneer. The connector was too small.   
B7 
5 unit 
telescoping 
bridge 
Broke 2 days  
in vivo after 
installation 
2010 
Zirconzahn 
zirconia 
Faulty preparation. A two stage fracture. 
Thermal crack during fabrication started at 
an adjustment and other damage in the core 
surface.  Final fracture from cantilevered 
loading in the patient’s mouth.  Ref. 9 
C1 
Incisor crown, 
European #13  
**** 
Broke in 14 
months in vivo 
2011 
Zenotec Zirox 
zirconia 
Residual stresses from firing caused a crack 
in the veneer.  The crack grew and caused 
the entire veneer to detach. 
 
 
 
+ 
Courtesy Dr. V. Sundar, Ceramco, York, PA, USA. 
 
?    Probable material type, see text. 
 
* 
Courtesy Dr. E. Brzozowski, Florida, USA. 
 
** 
Courtesy Prof. T. Kosmac, Joseph Stephan Institute, Slovenia. 
 
*** 
Courtesy Dr. S. Gritz, North Potomac, MD, USA 
 
**** Courtesy Dr. G. Arnetzyl, Vienna, Austria. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1  Case B1. Views of the fractured zirconia bridge.  The origin was on the underside of 
the connector.  A small medium-sized arrow in (b) shows a large sintering crack. 
a  Commercial products and equipment are identified only to specify adequately experimental procedures and does 
not imply endorsement by the authors, institutions or organizations supporting this work, nor does it imply that they 
are necessarily the best for the purpose.
a
b
origin 
origin 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
41
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
   
Figure 2.  Case B1.   Views of the origin site.  (a) The low magnification optical image shows 
hackle leading back to the origin site as well as localized machining crack hackle at the origin 
itself. (black arrow).  (b) Dr. J. Quinn used montages of many SEM photos to painstakingly 
create a map leading back to this site.  She marked the origin grinding flaw with the arrows 
shown.  The small steps and shadows in (a) are washed out by the SEM. 
 
 
CASE B1:  A zirconia bridge 
 
This Cercon CAM (computer assisted machining) prepared zirconia bridge fractured in 
vivo 2003.  No documentation was furnished and only one piece was retrieved.  Figure 1 shows 
that the fracture occurred at the connector to an end molar unit.  The connector had a good cross 
section size.    Figure 1b appeared in the Guide to Fractography as illustration (Figure 4.7a) of 
how a large sintering crack could be present in a ceramic, but not necessarily act as a fracture 
origin.  Figure 2 shows the fracture surface and radiating hackle lines led back to the origin site. 
The origin was on the underside of the connector was grinding cracking that generated 
“machining crack hackle” once fracture occurred.  These are described in detail in Refs. 
11,12,13.  They are much easier to see with a low power optical microscope (Figure 2a) than 
with the scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Figure 2b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Case B2.   A laboratory fractured zirconia bridge.  (a) shows the gold-coated incisor 
end unit.  The connector size is too small.  The small arrow in (a) shows a compression curl.  The 
large arrow shows the origin site. (b) shows the fracture surface and (c) shows the origin which is 
damage in the veneer (circled) that propagated a crack into the ceramic core. 
a 
b 
a
b
c
core
ceramic
glassy veneer
1 mm
42
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
CASE B2:  A training course zirconia bridge 
 
This Cercon CAD zirconia bridge fractured in the lab in 2003 during fabrication training.  
Only an incisor end unit (Fig. 3) was available.  The connector size (  2 mm) was too small.  The 
low magnification image (Figure 3a) shows a compression curl which is indicative of a bending 
fracture.  The origin is located opposite to it.  This bridge broke primarily from a sideways force 
probably from mishandling or possibly during the grinding.  SEM images (Figures 3b,c) show 
the fracture surface is very smooth and almost featureless, indicative of a low energy, low 
strength fracture.  The origin was microcracking and bubbles in the veneer.  They combined to 
make a crack that propagated into the core.  Additional SEM images (not shown) show the core 
crack progressed in stages with multiple concentric semielliptical arrest lines.  
 
CASE B3:  A training course four-unit posterior zirconia bridge  
 
 
This also was a training course restoration.   Figure 4a shows that this bridge was 
designed to be supported by three abutments.  Fracture occurred at one connector to the pontic.   
This connector was too small.  The location of the compression curl indicated that this bridge 
also broke from sideways flexure.  It also was a low energy, low strength fracture.  Optical 
photos in Figure 5 confirmed that the origin comprised irregularities in the veneer as well as 
“zipper machining cracks”  in the core ceramic from machining.    
 
Figure 4.  Case B3:  A four-unit posterior zirconia bridge in (a).   The piece on the left is gold 
coated. (b) shows the fracture surfaces with the piece’s occlusal surfaces mounted back-to-back.  
Compression curls are marked with small arrows.  The origin is marked by the large arrows.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Case B3.  Optical views of the fracture surface.  (a) and (b) are gold coated. The origin 
is a series of small grinding cracks in the core that were covered by the veneer.  Gold coating and 
vicinal shadow illumination make the “zipper machining crack” hackle lines easy to see with 
optical examination.  They were not evident with high magnification SEM examination. (c) is a 
simple optical image of the uncoated fracture surface taken by Dr. J. Quinn in 2003 that also 
shows the grinding crack hackle and veneer irregularities. 
origin
origin 
Compression curl 
a
b
c
a
b
5 mm
5 mm
pontic 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
43
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
CASE B4:   A three-unit alumina bridge 
 
This was a three-unit anterior maxillary bridge, shown in Figure 6, which fractured at the 
connector to the right central incisor in mid-2009 after approximately four years in the patient’s 
mouth.  This case was presented in some detail in Ref. 9 and this case included here for 
comparison to the other bridge cases. The bridge was cemented to abutments on the end two 
units #8 and #10.  The clinician who donated the broken FPD detected a crack in the incisor (#8) 
during a routine checkup and monitored its progress with time.  When fracture occurred, he was 
able to retrieve units #8 and #9 on either side of the fracture plane.  The clinician believed that 
the restoration was a zirconia, but our analysis showed that it was actually glass-infused alumina.   
 
 
 
Figure 6.   Case B4.  The three-unit anterior maxillary bridge which broke through the side of the 
incisor unit #8 as shown in (a).   Crack propagation occurred as shown by the arrows in (b).  The 
triangular broken fragment was reattached for this photo. 
 
Figure 6b shows a close-up with arrows marking the direction of crack propagation (dcp) 
away from the origin site A, which was on the margin.  Figure 7 shows the fracture surface.  The 
crack went down the side wall of #8 to the incisal edge.   It then went around the restoration and 
caused a large triangular piece to break off.  The origin region is shown in Figures 7a and 8.  
There were no severe material irregularities or gross flaws at the margin.  The lack of a fracture 
mirror indicated the fracture stress was low.  The margin was well-prepared and had a smooth 
rounded edge.  Nevertheless, there is a small crack at the bottom, and combined with hoop 
stresses acting on the rim of the unit (presumably created by occlusal biting forces), the crack 
propagated up the thin wall of the tooth and split it.  This is a failure mode that has been 
observed before in a number of single crowns, especially if they are very thin or if the margin is 
damaged during manufacture or installation.     As a consequence, it is strongly advised to not 
use “knife-edge” or “feather” margins, which some clinicians like to use for aesthetic reasons.   
Such restoration margins are simply too vulnerable even if a strong ceramic is used.   
 
Figure 7b shows an SEM image of a polished portion of a fragment from core ceramic 
portion of the specimen.  It is a two-phase material with residual porosity.  The primary 
constituents were aluminum, calcium, lanthanum and silicon.  This is not a zirconia restoration, 
but most likely that of a glass-infused alumina and is likely Vita Inceram alumina.    
 
 
 
a
b
8          9      10 
Broken piece 
reattached
44
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
Figure 7.   Case B4.   (a) is a SEM image of the fracture surface on unit #8.  The layered 
structure of a ceramic restoration is revealed.  The thin tapered margin blends into the gum line 
and is the site of the fracture origin.  This origin site is near to, but not at, the connector to the 
next unit, #9.    (b) shows the core ceramic microstructure. 
 
Figure 8.  Case B4.  SEM close-ups of the margin region showing hackle lines that indicate the 
dcp. Fracture started at the tip of the margin (large arrow on the right image). The margin is 
smooth and rounded and has no obvious faults, with the exception of a possible tiny crack.  
 
CASE B5:  Three (or more) unit zirconia bridge 
 
This was a three (or more) unit anterior bridge, shown in Figure 9, which fractured in 
European unit #25 near to but not at the connector in 2011 after 4 years in vivo.  This case has 
not been documented previously.  Only three pieces were obtained from one end of the 
restoration and the documentation was incomplete. Two of the three fragments were separated 
during extraction.  The clinical fracture face was on the left on unit #27 as seen in the figure. 
Units #27 and #26 were fitted to abutments, but #25 was cantilevered. The restoration was 
prepared during a training course and was designed by an experienced elder dental technician, 
but fabricated by an unknown attendee in the course. The bridge framework was made with a 
Sirona copy milling machine.   The fracture surface (Figs. 10 and 11) and the underside of the 
proximal connector (Fig. 9b) had very unusual markings.  The veneer was badly crazed on the 
connector underside, indicating an improper composition or application, or improper furnace 
operation.   
b
a
a
b
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
45
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
Figure 9.   Case B5.  Multiunit zirconia bridge.  The underside of the connector and the fracture 
surface had very unusual features. 
 
Figure 10.   Case B5.  Views of the fracture surface.  Half of the fracture surface on either side 
on the bottom (circled) was extremely rough and the microstructure did not match that of the 
core material on the upper half of the fracture surface.  Notice the glassy appearance of the 
material as shown on the right in the vicinity of the arrow tip. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Case B5.  Views of the fracture surface.  (a) shows another view of how irregular the 
fracture surface was.  (b) is a composite SEM image that shows the extraordinary crazing and 
cracking on the rough zone. 
 
a
b
a
b
a
b
abutment 
occlusal surface 
46
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
 
Energy dispersive spectroscopy revealed that (on a side of the bridge well away from the 
fracture location) the veneer contained elements typical of a feldspathic veneer: Si, K, Ca plus 
traces of Ti, Cr, Fe, Cu, Zn in addition to some signals of Zr, Y and Al from the core, but no La.  
The veneer glass composition on the connector underside where the crazing occurred was 
identified as Si, K, Ca, Cu or Zn, and some La as well as the Zr and Al from the core.  The 
abnormal material on the rough part of the fracture surface was composed of strong Zr, Y, Al, Si, 
La, K, Ca, Zn, and possible Ti.   The Zr, Y, Al, Si, and La are characteristic of Inceram AZ 
material, but the material in the rough zone appeared very glassy and was transparent, unlike the 
core material exposed at the top of the fracture surface.   
 
No distinct fracture origin was detected, but on the basis of the extremely unusual 
fracture surface morphology and glassy structure of the framework material in the fracture site, it 
is believed that this bridge was cracked during a step in the fabrication process.  Glassy material 
from the core and veneer “healed” the crack and the restoration survived in vivo for 4 years.  
One wonders whether the veneer crazing on the underside of the connector should have warned 
the technician or the clinician that something was amiss.  The connector also was too small: 
measuring only 2 mm to 2.5 mm in height. 
   
CASE B6:  Three-unit e.max Press lithium disilicate bridge 
 
This three unit bridge broke in 2011 after seven weeks in vivo (Figure 12).  When the 
patient was seen by the dentist, both connectors were broken, but the pontic section was still in 
place from mechanical interlocking.  The connector shown on the right (Fig. 12c) fractured first, 
and continued occlusal loading and usage caused the second connector (Fig. 12a) to break from 
bending.  Only the middle unit, the pontic was available for examination, but fortunately it had  
 
 
Figure 12.  Case B6. Middle molar unit of a three-unit bridge.  The wing photos (a) and (c) show 
the fractured connectors on each side. (d) and (e) are close-ups of both broken connectors after 
gold coating.  The right connector broke first and has a flatter and straighter fracture plane. 
 
a
b
c
d
e
Close up of (a) 
Close up of (c)
origin 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
47
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
both fracture planes.  The connector cross section sizes were probably too small for this glass 
ceramic.  The secondary fracture started with an origin at the top.  There was a lot of twisting 
and bending of this fracture surface, and this location suggested that this fracture was the second 
fracture.  The primary origin was on the right side from the gingival-lingual area.  Close-up 
examination (Figure 13) revealed that the origin was a single small contact damage site on the 
veneer outer surface.  Cracking propagated in short steps through the veneer, and then into the 
core, also in a few steps until final catastrophic fracture occurred.  Close-up photos of the contact 
site (not shown here due to space limitations) reveal classical tertiary Wallner lines and localized 
hackle radiation right at the contact site.  Since it is down on the inside of the mouth, the patient 
would have had difficulty inflicting damage at this site. It is more likely that a dental probe or 
tool in the dental lab created the initial damage.  
This is an excellent example of a serious 
issue in ceramics:  one small spot or vulnerable in a surface coating can act as a weak link.  The 
core ceramic itself can be nearly perfect, with no flaws, but once the crack initiates in the 
coating, it can easily propagate into the bulk.   
 
 
Figure 13.  Case B6.   SEM close ups of the origin.  Radiating hackle lines converge on the 
origin region.  The small arrows in (a) mark a subtle curved crack arrest line in the core ceramic, 
one of many such concentric arcs.  Close-up examination of the origin in (b) reveals tiny wake 
hackle lines radiating behind the pores, and multiple arrest lines (marked by small arrows).  
Fracture initiated at the single contact damage site in the veneer outer surface, and propagated in 
steps through the veneer and then on into the core ceramic.   
 
 
CASE B7:  A five-unit zirconia telescoping denture 
 
Three segments were used to replace the entire upper dental arch including substantial 
missing hard and soft tissues as shown in the left of Figure 14.  This case has been presented in 
detail previously.9  Six implant posts supported the segments.  The segment that fractured after 
installation was the five-unit telescoping denture made of a single large piece of veneered 
zirconia as shown in Figure 14a.  It ran from the upper left lateral incisor to the upper left first 
molar and was attached to two screw implants that anchored the part at the incisor and second 
premolar teeth.  The cantilevered end unit broke off the restoration in 2010 only 2 days after 
cementation. The patient exerted normal biting forces. This fracture was very surprising since the 
last molar was connected to the rest of the restoration by a very large 10 mm x 12 mm cross 
section. It is hard to imagine that a patient could apply sufficient biting forces to snap off such a 
a
b
48
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
Figure 14.  Case B7.  Overall view of the fractured 5-unit denture. (a) is a laboratory view of the 
three segments comprising the maxillary arch with the location of the supporting screw implants.  
Fracture occurred (arrow) in the right side 5 unit segment where the last molar was cantilevered 
beyond the implant post. (b) and (c) show the fracture.  The origin was at site A. 
 
 
large, stubby zirconia cantilever.   
 
The zirconia was CAD/CAM machined from presintered zirconia blocks and then 
partially reduced in size in some areas for the application of a porcelain veneer.   The core 
ceramic was colored, sintered, and then the veneer was then applied.  All processing steps were 
carried out in accordance with manufacturer’s guidelines.  The clinical aspects of this case have 
been documented by Karl and Bauernschmidt.14  There were two main intersecting crack systems 
as shown in Figure 15a.  The first crack was a very smooth and almost featureless thermal crack 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Case B7.   Stereoptical microscope images of the gold-coated molar unit that broke 
off the end.  The initial starting point of fracture is in the upper left in (a).  A thermal crack 
popped in more than halfway through the piece as shown by the first set of arrows   Final 
fracture radiated in steps outwards towards the lingual side as shown by the second set of arrows. 
(b) shows a close-up of the origin site A.  The core ceramic had some surface irregularities in the 
surface including waviness.  The veneer also had grinding–adjustments that penetrated through 
the veneer into the core ceramic.    
A
A
2 implant 
post supports 
Cantilevered 
molar
a
b
c
a
b
A
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
49
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
that popped in from origin site A during processing.  The crack ran halfway through the piece 
and severely weakened it.  The second fracture occurred when the end molar finally broke off in 
the patient’s mouth.  Close-up SEM examination of the origin shown in Figure 15b revealed 
irregularities in the core ceramic surface plus some grinding adjustment damage. 
 
Very smooth, almost featureless, wavy fracture planes are commonly generated by 
thermal stress fractures.   These can occur from: sudden temperature changes, thermal gradients 
set up by non-uniform heating or cooling, or internal residual stresses set up during firing.   It 
cannot be ascertained with certainty whether the first crack formed during the cool down or after 
removal from the furnace.  It is very likely that the veneer covered a cracked foundation piece or 
the crack may have popped in during the firing of the veneer. 
 
CASE: C1 Incisor zirconia crown    
 
This case has nothing in common with the previous seven, with the exception that it too 
was a very unusual fracture.  It was provided by the clinician from Vienna, Austria who dutifully 
reported the material system, the dental laboratory, the duration prior to fracture and the fact that 
it broke during normal bite functioning.   Figure 16 shows the broken piece, which as subsequent 
analysis showed, was all porcelain veneer!  It appeared that it completely detached from the core 
zirconia ceramic.  Fractographic images with optical (Figure 17) and scanning electron 
microscopy (not shown) revealed that fracture started on the inside of the crown, about 0.5 mm 
below the outer crown surface.  The fracture was entirely within the two layer veneer, and 
propagated entirely around the tooth without penetrating into the zirconia at all. The zirconia part 
of the crown remained in the mouth attached to the abutment, but had to be extracted and 
replaced.    The veneer porcelain was primarily composed the usual elements of a feldspathic 
porcelain and included Si, Al, Ca, K, Fe but also a surprising amount of Cu.  The origin crack, 
and especially its location, is very unusual and suggestive of a thermal crack possibly created 
during cool down.  Figure 17c shows an extraordinary array of concentric semicircular cracks 
radiating outward from the origin.  These are arrest lines and probably correlate with fatigue 
stepwise growth of the crack. This fracture sequence is similar to another veneered zirconia 
crown analyzed by Lohbauer in 2011.15 In that case, the crack popped into the veneer from 
occlusal surface contact damage, and then curved around the porcelain and the interface avoiding 
the zirconia core.  There is steadily growing literature (e.g., Tholey et al., Ref. 16) showing that 
cool down rates through the glass transition temperature and thermal gradients in furnaces and 
restorations create strong residual tensile stresses in zirconia veneers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  Case C1.  Detached porcelain veneer on the incisor crown that broke in-vivo at 14 
months.  The side extension of the crown is termed a “handle” for orientation convenience. 
Facial view 
Side view 
“handle” 
a
b
50
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
 
Figure 17.  Case C1.  Images of the interior surface.  The fracture origin is an internal crack 
(large arrows) that started entirely in the outer veneer and then propagated into both porcelain 
layers in steps creating concentric arrest lines.  
 
DISCUSSION 
 
As noted in the introduction, it is important to identify the causes of fracture so that 
manufacturers, clinicians, and laboratory technicians can minimize the incidence of breakage.  
Identification of the mechanisms of fracture can help researchers can develop relevant testing 
procedures.  Table 1 shows that there were multiple causes of failure including faulty design of 
the restoration, faulty preparation, or damage from clinician handling or adjustments.   There 
were no fracture mirrors, so all the fractures occurred at relatively low stress levels.    
 
These examples reinforce some lessons learned in earlier analyses.  Design issues such as 
thin margins (Case B4) or connectors that are too small (Cases B2,B3,B5) are known 
contributors to fracture.  Grinding cracks from CAD machining (Cases B1-B3) can create 
strength limiting flaws that are often easier to see optically than in the SEM.  Other large 
(thermal) cracks may be created in the core material in the laboratory and may be sealed over by 
the veneer (Cases B5,B7) but severely compromise the integrity of the restoration.  Chipping and 
delamination of veneers from zirconia crowns (Case C1) can be a problem.  There also is a new 
growing literature of origin cracks forming in veneers, especially at concentrations of bubbles or 
from contact damage, and then propagating into the core.  The veneers are supposed to be in 
residual compression, but if they are irregular with bubble clusters (Case B6),8 too thin, or 
damaged by the lab or clinician (also Case B6), they can act as fracture initiation sites.  Careful 
application of veneers is important.   
 
 We are encouraged that fractographic analysis is increasingly being used to study 
clinical fractures, and that clinically relevant laboratory testing procedures are being developed 
as a result.17,18  These are far more valuable19 than “crunch the crown” type tests that were 
fashionable in the 1990s and 2000s.    
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
Seven bridges and one crown fractures were analyzed.  Several fracture modes and 
origin types were identified.  These cases illustrate that all-ceramic restorations are susceptible to 
fracture from a variety of causes.  Proper design and fabrication procedures must be established 
and followed to eliminate in vivo fractures. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This work was made possible by a grant from NIH, R01-DE17983, and the support of the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology and the ADAF Volpe Research Center.   Dr. J. 
Quinn did preliminary analyses of Cases B1 – B3 and several of her photos are used as noted. 
 
 
a
b
c
“handle” 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
51
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations
REFERENCES  
1  J. B. Quinn, S. S. Scherrer, G. D. Quinn, The Increasing Role of Fractography in the Dental 
Community,  pp. 253 – 270 in Fractography of Glasses and Ceramics, Vol. 5, eds, J. R. Varner, 
G. D. Quinn, M. Wightman, American Ceramic Society, Westerville, OH, 2007. 
2  S. S. Scherrer, J. B. Quinn, G. D. Quinn, H. W. A. Wiskott, Descriptive Fractography on All 
Ceramic Dental Crown Failures, pp. 339 – 352 in Fractography of Glasses and Ceramics, Vol. 5, 
eds., J. R. Varner, G. D. Quinn, M. Wightman, Amer. Ceram. Soc., Westerville, OH, 2007. 
3  J. B. Quinn, G. D. Quinn, J. R. Kelly, S. S. Scherrer, Fractographic Analyses of Three 
Ceramic Whole Crown Restoration Failures, Dental Materials, 21, 920 – 929 (2005).  
4  S. S. Scherrer, J. B. Quinn, G. D. Quinn, J. R. Kelly, Failure Analysis of Ceramic Clinical 
Cases Using Qualitative Fractography, Int. J. Prosthodont., 19 (2), 151 – 158 (2006). 
5  S. S. Scherrer, G. D. Quinn, J. B. Quinn, Fractographic Failure Analysis of a Procera AllCeram 
Crown Using Stereo and Scanning Electron Microscopy,  Dental Materials, 24, (2008) 1107 – 1113. 
6 
S. S. Scherrer, J. B. Quinn, G. D. Quinn, H. W. A. Wiscott, Fractographic Ceramic Failure 
Analysis Using the Replica Technique:  Two Case Studies, Dental Materials, 23 (11), (2006) 
1397-1404. 
7  S. S. Scherrer, J. B. Quinn, and G. D. Quinn, Fractography of Dental Restorations, pp. 72- 81 
in Fractography of Advanced Ceramics, III, ed. J. Dusza, R. Danzer, R. Morrell, G. Quinn, 
TransTech Publ., Zurich, 2009. 
8  U. Lohbauer, G. Amberger, G. D. Quinn, S. S. Scherrer, Fractographic Analysis of a Dental 
Zirconia Framework: A Case Study on Design Issues, J. Mech. Behav. Biom. Mat., 3, 623-629 
(2010). 
9  G. D. Quinn, K. Hoffman, S. Scherrer, U. Lohbauer, G. Amberger, M. Karl, J. R. Kelly, 
Fractographic Analysis of Broken Ceramic Dental Restorations, pp. 161-174 in, Fractography of 
Glasses and Ceramics, VI, Ceramic Transactions, Volume 230, eds. J. R. Varner, M. Wightman, 
Wiley, New York, 2012. 
10  G. D. Quinn, Guide to Practice for Fractography of Ceramics and Glasses, NIST Special 
Publication SP 960-16, May 2007. 
11  G. D. Quinn, L. K. Ives, S. Jahanmir, P. Koshy, Fractographic Analysis of Machining Cracks 
in Silicon Nitride Rods and Bars, pp. 343 – 365 in Fractography of Glasses and Ceramics IV, 
Ceramic Trans., Vol. 122, eds. J. Varner, G. Quinn, Amer. Ceram. Soc., Westerville, OH, 2001.  
12  G. D. Quinn, L. K. Ives, S. Jahanmir, Machining Damage Cracks:  How to Find and 
Characterize Them by Fractography, Ceram. Eng. Sci Proc., 24 (4), 383-394 (2003). 
13  G. D. Quinn, L. K, Ives, S. Jahanmir, On the Nature of Machining Cracks in Ground 
Ceramics: Part I:  SRBSN Strengths and Fractographic Analysis, Machining Science and 
Technology, 9, 169 – 210 (2005). 
14  M. Karl, B. Bauernschmidt, Erste Erfahrungen mit Telescopierendem Zahnersatz aus 100% 
Zirconiumdioxid, Qunitessenz Zahntech 36 (1) 86-94 (2010). 
15  Private communication, Prof. U. Lohbauer, 2011. 
16  M. J. Tholey, M V. Swain, N. Thiel, Thermal Gradients and Residual Stresses in Veneered 
Y-TZP Frameworks, Dent. Mater., 27, 1102 – 1110 (2011). 
17 M. Oilo, Fractographic Analysis of All-Ceramic Crowns: A Study of 27 Clinically-Fractured 
Crowns, Dent. Mater., 29 (6), e74-84 (2013). 
18  M. Oilo, Clinically Relevant Fracture Testing of All-Ceramic Crowns, Dent. Mater., 29, 815 
– 823 (2013). 
19 J. R. Kelly, P. Benetti, P. Rungruanganunt, A. Della Bona, The Slippery Slope – Critical 
Perspectives on in vitro Research Methodologies, Dent. Mater., 28, 41-51 (2012).  
53
IN VIVO EVALUATION OF SCAFFOLDS WITH A GRID-LIKE MICROSTRUCTURE 
COMPOSED OF A MIXTURE OF SILICATE (13-93) AND BORATE (13-93B3) BIOACTIVE 
GLASSES 
 
Yifei Gu1, Wenhai Huang1, Mohamed N. Rahaman2 
1School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China 
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering and Center for Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO 65409-0340, USA 
 
ABSTRACT 
A borate bioactive glass (designated 13-93B3) converts faster to hydroxyapatite (HA) than 
silicate 13-93 bioactive glass but recent studies have shown conflicting results for its capacity to 
repair rat calvarial defects. In this study, scaffolds composed of 13-93 and 13-93B3 glass alone 
and composite scaffolds composed of a mixture of 13-93 and 13-93B3 glasses were created with 
the same grid-like microstructure (porosity = 47%; filament diameter = 330 μm; pore width = 
300 μm) using a robocasting technique. When implanted in rat calvarial defects in vivo, the 
scaffolds showed a decreasing capacity to regenerate bone with increasing volume fraction of 
13-93B3 glass in the scaffolds. The percent new bone in the defects implanted with the 13-93 
scaffolds (23 ± 4 % at 6 weeks and 28 ± 8% at 12 weeks) was significantly higher than in the 
defects implanted with the 13-93B3 scaffolds (6 ± 4 % at 6 weeks and 9 ± 7 % at 12 weeks). 
While the 13-93 glass was only partially converted to HA after 12 weeks in vivo, the 13-93B3 
glass was almost fully converted within 6 weeks. Composite scaffolds composed of an optimized 
mixture of silicate 13-93 and borate 13-93B3 bioactive glasses may provide advantages for bone 
and tissue healing over scaffolds composed of 13-93 or 13-93B3 glass alone.   
 
INTRODUCTION 
Large bone defects resulting from civilian and war trauma, malignancy, and congenital 
diseases are commonly encountered in orthopaedic practice [1, 2]. Autologous bone grafts, the 
gold standard for treatment, heal reliably but they are limited by availability and donor site 
morbidity [3]. Bone allografts are alternatives but they are expensive, suffer from uncertain 
healing to bone, and carry the risk of disease transmission and adverse host immune reaction [4]. 
Because of these disadvantages, the need for synthetic bone grafts continues to grow. 
Bioactive glasses have attractive properties as a scaffold material for bone repair because of 
their ability to convert to hydroxyapatite (HA), bond to bone in vivo, and enhance osteogenesis 
and revascularization [5ࡁ7]. The silicate glass designated 45S5 is the most widely studied 
bioactive glass and it has been widely available for commercial use since the 1980s [7]. Another 
silicate bioactive glass, designated 13-93, is also used clinically [6]. The composition of 13-93 
glass is based on 45S5 but the glass contains additional oxides that allow it to be more readily 
fabricated into anatomically relevant shapes [8]. Porous scaffolds of 13-93 glass with a grid-like 
microstructure have been created by a robotic deposition (robocasting) method with compressive 
strengths comparable to human cortical bone (100ࡁ150 MPa) [9ࡁ11], high mechanical reliability 
(high Weibull modulus) and excellent fatigue resistance [11].  
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
54
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
A borate bioactive glass designated 13-93B3, obtained by replacing all of the SiO2 in silicate 
13-93 glass with B2O3, has been the subject of several recent studies [6]. Borate 13-93B3 glass 
has been shown to convert more rapidly to HA in an aqueous phosphate solution when compared 
to silicate bioactive glasses such as 45S5 and 13-93 [12ࡁ14]. Borate 13-93B3 glass can also be 
formed into porous 3-D structures [6]. Scaffolds of 13-93B3 glass with a “trabecular” 
microstructure similar to dry human trabecular bone have shown the capacity to support soft 
tissue infiltration when implanted in rat subcutaneous sites [15]. Scaffolds of 13-93B3 glass with 
a “fibrous” microstructure, composed of thermally-bonded short glass fibers, were found to have 
a greater capacity to regenerate bone in rat calvarial defects when compared to 13-93 scaffolds 
with a similar microstructure [16]. However, in another study, fibrous scaffolds showed a 
decreasing capacity to regenerate bone in rat calvarial defects with increasing volume fraction of 
13-93B3 glass in the scaffolds [17]; in particular, scaffolds composed of 13-93B3 glass alone 
showed a significantly lower capacity to regenerate bone than 13-93 scaffolds.   
In view of the conflicting results for the capacity of 13-93B3 scaffolds to regenerate bone 
[16, 17], this study was undertaken to create and evaluate scaffolds composed of 13-93 glass and 
varying volume fractions of 13-93B3 glass (0ࡁ100%). The scaffolds were fabricated by a robotic 
deposition (robocasting) technique to create the same grid-like microstructure. The capacity of 
the scaffolds to regenerate bone in rat calvarial defects was studied as a function of the volume 
fraction of 13-93B3 glass in the scaffolds.     
  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Fabrication of bioactive glass scaffolds 
The silicate 13-93 and borate 13-93B3 bioactive glasses used in this study were prepared by 
conventional melting and casting; they were provided by Mo-Sci Corp., Rolla, MO. The 
compositions of the glasses are given in Table I. Four groups of scaffolds with the same grid-like 
microstructure were prepared using a robocasting technique. Two groups were composed of 
13-93 and 13-93B3 glass alone. The other two groups were composed of an inner cylindrical 
region of 13-93 glass and an outer axially concentric layer of 13-93B3 glass (see Fig. 1). Two 
different thicknesses were used to vary the volume fraction of 13-93B3 glass in the composite 
scaffolds. Based on the better capacity of 13-93B3 scaffolds to regenerate bone reported in one 
study [16], the borate 13-93B3 glass was designed to form the outer layer in the composite 
scaffolds. This meant that the 13-93B3 glass would be in apposition with the original (host) bone 
in the defect site. The scaffolds in all four groups were prepared with a final external diameter of 
4.6 mm, the diameter of the rat calvarial defects used in the in vivo experiments.  
The creation of the 13-93 and 13-93B3 scaffolds is described in detail elsewhere [11, 18]. 
Briefly, the as-received glass was crushed in a steel shatterbox (8500 Shatterbox®, Spex 
SamplePrep LLC, Metuchen, NJ) and sieved to give particles of size <53 μm. Then the particles 
of each glass were ground for 2.5 h in an attrition mill (Model 01-HD, Union Process, Akron, 
OH) using ZrO2 grinding media (3 mm in diameter) and water (for the 13-93 glass) or ethanol 
(for the 13-93B3 glass) as the liquid medium. The average particle size of each glass was 2 μm. 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
55
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
Table I. Nominal composition (in wt%) of 13-93 and 13-93B3 bioactive glasses. 
Glass 
Na2O 
K2O 
MgO 
CaO 
SiO2 
B2O3 
P2O5 
13-93 
6 
12 
5 
20 
53 
0 
4 
13-93B3 
6 
12 
5 
20 
0 
53 
4 
 
An aqueous-based paste composed of 40 vol% glass particles and 20 wt% aqueous 
Pluronic® F-127 solution was used to form the silicate 13-93 scaffolds. Because of the higher 
reactivity of the 13-93B3 glass, an organic-based paste composed of 40 vol% glass particles, 
12.8 vol% ethyl cellulose (EC; Acros Organics), 4.3 vol% poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) (PEG 
300; Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, MA) and 42.9 vol% ethanol was used to prepare the 13-93B3 
scaffolds. The paste was loaded into a robocasting device (RoboCAD 3.0; 3D Inks, Stillwater, 
OK) and deposited on an Al2O3 substrate. Scaffolds with a grid-like microstructure were formed 
by extruding the paste through a 410 μm nozzle (EFD precision tips, East Providence, RI) with a 
center-to-center distance between the filaments of 910 μm. The scaffolds were dried for 24 h at 
room temperature, heated at 0.5 ºC/min to 600 ºC (13-93 glass) or to 500 ºC (13-93B3 glass) in 
flowing O2 gas to burn out the processing additives, and sintered for 1 h at 700 C (13-93 glass) 
or for 1 h at 560 C (13-93B3 glass) (heating rate = 5 C/min) to densify the glass filaments.  
Composite scaffolds composed of a mixture of 13-93 and 13-93B3 glass were prepared as 
follows. Grid-like 13-93 constructs were first created using the procedure described above but 
with diameters of 3.3 mm and 3.8 mm after sintering. Then 13-93B3 constructs (diameter = 8 
mm) were formed, dried and thermally treated to burn out the processing additives as described 
above. The resulting constructs were infiltrated with camphene (Sigma; St. Louis, MO) and a 
cylindrical cavity (~3.3 or ~3.8 mm) was drilled in the axial direction of the constructs. After 
subliming the camphene in a fume hood overnight, the tubular 13-93B3 constructs were placed 
around the 13-93 glass scaffolds and the composite constructs were sintered for 1 h at 560 C 
(heating rate = 5 C/min) to densify the 13-93B3 glass filaments and to bond the 13-93B3 layer 
to the 13-93 phase. The two groups of scaffolds were composed of (1) an inner region of 13-93 
glass of diameter 3.8 mm and an outer layer of 13-93B3 glass of thickness 0.4 mm (designated 
“thin” 13-93B3 layer) and (2) an inner region of 13-93 glass of diameter 3.3 mm and an outer 
layer of 13-93B3 glass of thickness 0.65 mm (designated “thick” 13-93B3 layer). The glass 
phase in the scaffolds was composed of 67 vol% 13-93 and 33 vol% 13-93B3 (thin 13-93B3 
layer) and 50 vol% 13-93 and 50 vol% 13-93B3 (thick 13-93B3 layer). 
 
Characterization of as-fabricated scaffolds 
The porosity of the scaffolds was measured using the Archimedes method according to a 
standard procedure (ASTM C830), using water as the liquid medium. The microstructure of the 
scaffolds was examined in a field-emission scanning electron microscope, FE-SEM (S-4700, 
Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV and a working distance of 12 mm. 
Scaffolds composed of 13-93 and 13-93B3 alone with a cubic shape (6 mm × 6 mm × 6 mm) 
and composite scaffolds composed of 13-93 and 13-93B3 glass with a cylindrical shape (8 mm 
in diameter × 6 mm) were tested in an Instron testing machine (Model 4881; Instron, Norwood, 
56
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
MA) to measure their compressive strength and elastic modulus. Testing was performed at a 
deformation rate of 0.5 mm/min using a 10 kN load cell. Prior to the tests, the surfaces of the 
samples were ground using a surface grinder (FSG-618, Chevalier Machinery Inc., Santa Fe 
Springs, CA) to produce parallel contact surfaces. The load was applied to the samples in the 
direction perpendicular to the plane of robotic deposition (z direction). Five samples in each 
group were tested, and the data are expressed as a mean ± standard deviation (SD).  
 
Animals and surgical procedure 
All animal experimental procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee, 
Missouri University of Science and Technology, in compliance with the NIH Guide for Care and 
Use of Laboratory Animals (1985). The four groups of scaffolds were sterilized and implanted 
for 6 and 12 weeks in defects (4.6 mm in diameter) created in rat calvariae using a procedure 
described previously [17]. Briefly, scaffolds (4.6 mm in diameter × 1.5 mm) were washed three 
times with ethanol, dried at 60 ºC, and dry-heat sterilized for 12 h at 250 ºC. Twenty male 
Sprague Dawley rats (3 months old; weight = 350ࡁ400 g, Harlan Laboratories Inc., USA) were 
used in the experiments. The rats were pre-anesthetized with a combination of CO2 and air, and 
then anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection with a combination of ketamine (7 mg/kg) and 
xylazine (0.7 mg/kg). Using sterile instruments and aseptic technique, bilateral full-thickness 
defects 4.6 mm in diameter were created in the central area of each parietal bone using a 
saline-cooled trephine drill. The sites were constantly irrigated with sterile PBS to prevent 
overheating of the bone margins and to remove the bone debris. The bilateral defects were 
randomly implanted with 10 implants per group. Each animal received an intramuscular injection 
of ~200 μl penicillin and ~200 μl buprenorphine post-surgery. The animals were monitored daily. 
At 6 and 12 weeks, the animals were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation, and the calvarial defect sites 
with surrounding bone and soft tissue were harvested for subsequent evaluation. 
 
Histological processing 
The calvarial samples, including the defect sites with surrounding bone and tissue, were 
fixed in 10% buffered formaldehyde for 7 days and cut in half. Half of each sample was for 
paraffin embedding and the other half for methyl methacrylate embedding. The samples for 
paraffin embedding were de-siliconized by immersion in 10% hydrofluoric acid for 2 h, 
decalcified in 14% ethylendiaminetetracetic acid (EDTA) solution for 4 weeks, dehydrated in a 
series of graded ethanol, and embedded in paraffin using routine histological techniques. Then 
the specimens were sectioned to 5 μm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The 
undecalcified samples were dehydrated in ethanol and embedded in PMMA. Sections were cut to 
a thickness of ~ 200 μm using a microtome, affixed to acrylic slides, ground down to 30ࡁ40 μm 
using a surface grinder (EXAKT 400CS, Norderstedt, Germany), and stained using the von 
Kossa technique. Transmitted light images of the stained sections were taken with an Olympus 
BX 50 microscope connected with a CCD camera (DP70, Olympus, Japan). 
 
Histomorphometric analysis 
Histomorphometric analysis was carried out using optical images of the stained sections and 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
57
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
the ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, USA). The percent new bone formed in the 
defect sites implanted with the scaffolds was determined from the H&E stained sections. The 
entire defect area was defined as the area between the defect margins, including the entire glass 
scaffold and the tissue within. The newly formed bone was then outlined and measured. 
Quantitation of the von Kossa-positive stained area was performed using light micrographs of 
von Kossa-stained sections. The black-stained areas were outlined, measured and expressed as a 
fraction of the total defect area. Since the total black-stained area gave the mineralized bone area 
plus HA due to the glass conversion, the percent new bone determined from the H&E stained 
sections was subtracted from the total von Kossa positive area to determine the percent glass 
conversion. For each implantation time, five samples for each group were evaluated, and the 
results are presented as a mean ± SD.  
 
Statistical analysis 
Statistical analysis for differences between groups was performed using one-way analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post hoc test. Differences were considered significant for p < 
0.05.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Characteristics of bioactive glass scaffolds 
Figure 1aࡁd shows optical images of the top surface of the four groups of scaffolds as 
fabricated: 13-93 alone, 13-93 with a thin layer of 13-93B3 ( 33% 13-93B3), 13-93 with a thick 
layer of 13-93B3 ( 50% 13-93B3), and 13-93B3 alone. The 13-93 and 13-93B3 glass in all four 
scaffolds had the same grid-like microstructure shown in Fig. 1e, f, consisting of dense glass 
filaments (diameter = 330 ± 10 μm) and pores of width 300 ± 10 μm in the plane of deposition 
and 150 ± 10 μm in the direction perpendicular to the deposition plane. The porosity of the 
grid-like structure was 47 ± 1%. The darker color of the borate 13-93B3 glass phase in the 
scaffolds resulted from processing in an organic medium to avoid reaction with an aqueous 
medium. While the organic processing additives were burnt off as completely as possible, trace 
amounts of carbonaceous residue can lead to darkening of the glass after sintering. 
The compressive strength and elastic modulus of the scaffolds were dependent on the 
volume fraction of the borate 13-93B3 glass in the scaffold (Fig. 2). Because the strength of the 
BࡁO bond is weaker than that of the SiࡁO bond, the borate 13-93B3 glass has a lower 
compressive strength and elastic modulus than the silicate 13-93 glass, as observed previously 
[18, 19]. Consequently, for the geometry of the scaffolds used in this study, the strength and 
elastic modulus decreased with increasing volume fraction of 13-93B3 glass. Because of the 
lower strength of the 13-93B3 glass, the applied stress on the composite was supported mainly 
by the stronger 13-93 phase. The compressive strength and elastic modulus of the scaffolds 
decreased from 88  7 MPa and 10  1 GPa, respectively, for the 13-93 scaffolds to 28  11 MPa 
and 5  2 GPa, respectively, for the 13-93B3 scaffolds.   
 
 
58
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Optical images of the top surface of the four groups of grid-like scaffolds composed of  
(a) silicate 13-93 glass alone; (b) inner region of 13-93 glass and a thin outer layer of 13-93B3 
glass; (c) inner region of 13-93 glass and a thick outer layer of 13-93B3 glass; (d) borate 
13-93B3 glass alone. SEM images of 13-93 scaffold in the plane of deposition (xy plane) and in 
a plane perpendicular to the xy plane are shown in (e) and (f). 
 
Fig. 2. Compressive strength and elastic modulus of the four groups of scaffolds: 13-93, 13-93 
with a thin layer of 13-93B3 (abbreviated “thin layer”), 13-93 with a thick layer of 13-93B3 
(“thick layer”), and 13-93B3.  
 
Assessment of bone regeneration in vivo 
The capacity of the scaffolds to regenerate bone in the defects was assessed from images of 
the H&E stained sections. Figure 3 shows transmitted light images of H&E stained sections of 
the rat calvarial defects implanted with the four groups of scaffolds at 12 weeks. New bone filled 
a large fraction of the pore space of the 13-93 scaffolds and bridged the defect (Fig. 3a). For the 
defects implanted with the composite scaffolds containing a thin or thick 13-93B3 layer, new 
bone infiltrated the 13-93B3 layer as well as the 13-93 inner region (Fig. 3b, c). In comparison, 
new bone formation was limited to the periphery of the scaffolds composed of 13-93B3 glass 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
59
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
alone (Fig. 3d). New bone formation at 6 weeks showed features similar to those described for 
12 weeks but the amount of new bone appeared to be smaller. Images of the H&E stained 
sections at 6 weeks are omitted for brevity. 
 
Fig. 3. Optical images of H&E stained sections of rat calvarial defects implanted with the four 
groups of scaffolds at 12 weeks: (a) 13-93 scaffold; (b) 13-93 with thin layer of 13-93B3; (c) 
13-93 with thick layer of 13-93B3; (d) 13-93B3. O: original (host) bone; NB: new bone; SG: 
silicate glass; BG: borate glass; arrowheads indicate the edges of the defects. Scale bar = 1 mm. 
 
Fig. 4. Percent new bone in rat calvarial defects implanted with the four groups of scaffolds at 6  
and 12 weeks: 13-93, 13-93 with a thin layer of 13-93B3 (“thin layer”), 13-93 with a thick layer 
of 13-93B3 (“thick layer”), and 13-93B3. *Significant difference between groups (p<0.05).  
 
The percent new bone formed in the defects was quantitated from images of the H&E 
stained sections by normalizing the amount of new bone formed in the defects to the total defect 
area (Fig. 4). For each scaffold group, the average amount of new bone in the defects increased 
as the implantation time increased from 6 to 12 weeks but the increase was not significant (Table 
II). At each implantation time, the amount of new bone in the defects decreased as the amount of 
borate glass in the scaffolds increased. The amount of new bone in the defects implanted with the 
(a) 
(b)
(c) 
(d)
60
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
13-93B3 scaffolds (6 ± 4 % at 6 weeks and 9 ± 7 % at 12 weeks) was significantly lower than in 
the defects implanted with the 13-93 scaffolds (23 ± 4 % at 6 weeks, 28 ± 8% at 12 weeks) at 
each implantation time. 
 
Table II.  Percent new bone, total von Kossa positive area (Total VK+ area) and von Kossa- 
positive area due to glass conversion to HA (Glass VK+ area) in rat calvarial defects at 6 weeks 
and 12 weeks post-implantation. 
Scaffold 
New bone (%) 
Total VK+ area (%)
Glass VK+ area (%) 
6w 
12w 
6w 
12w 
6w 
12w 
13-93 
23 ± 4 
28 ± 8 
35 ± 6 
44 ± 6 
12 ± 2 
16 ± 5 
Thin 13-93B3 layer 
11 ± 8 26 ± 17
36 ± 7 
55 ± 9 
25 ± 12 
28 ± 5 
Thick 13-93B3 layer 
9 ± 8 
21 ± 13
43 ± 7 
55± 11 
34 ± 5 
34 ± 10 
13-93B3 
6 ± 4 
9 ± 7 
56 ± 12 
61± 11 
50 ± 13 
51 ± 10 
  
Assessment of mineralized bone and scaffold conversion to HA in vivo 
Optical images of von Kossa-stained sections of the defects implanted with the four groups 
of scaffolds at 12 weeks are shown in Fig. 5. The total von Kossa-positive area (the dark-stained 
area) within the defect indicated the presence of phosphate materials due to mineralized bone and 
to HA due to conversion of the bioactive glass scaffolds. The 13-93B3 glass appeared to be fully 
converted to HA within 6 weeks (results not shown). In comparison, the 13-93 glass was only 
partially converted at 12 weeks. 
 
Fig. 5. Optical images of von Kossa-stained sections of rat calvarial defects implanted with the 
four groups of scaffolds at 12 weeks: (a) 13-93; (b) 13-93 with thin layer of 13-93B3; (c) 13-93 
with thick layer of 13-93B3; (d) 13-93B3. Scale bar = 1 mm.  
 
For each group of scaffolds, the average total von Kossa-positive area, normalized to the 
total defect area, increased as the implantation time increased from 6 to 12 weeks but the 
difference was not significant (Fig. 6a). At 6 weeks, the defects implanted with the 13-93B3 
scaffold had a significantly higher total von Kossa positive area than the defects implanted with 
13-93 scaffold and with the composite scaffold composed of 13-93 glass with a thin layer of 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
61
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
13-93B3. There was no significant difference among the four groups at 12 weeks.  
In order to assess the von Kossa-positive area due to the conversion of the scaffolds to HA 
(Fig. 6b), the percent new bone formed in the defect, determined from the H&E stained sections 
was subtracted from the total von Kossa-positive area. For each group of scaffolds, the von 
Kossa positive area due to the glass conversion showed little increase as the implantation time 
increased from 6 weeks to 12 weeks. This can be explained in terms of the complete conversion 
of the 13-93B3 glass by 6 weeks and the slow conversion of the 13-93 glass with time. The von 
Kossa-positive area due to the conversion of the 13-93B3 scaffold was significantly higher than 
the values for the other three groups at 6 weeks and significantly higher than the 13-93 scaffold 
at 12 weeks. The von Kossa-positive area due to the conversion of the 13-93B3 scaffold was 50 
 13% at 6 weeks and 51  10% at 12 weeks. These values are comparable to the volume 
fraction of the glass phase (53  1%) in the as-fabricated scaffolds, confirming the complete 
conversion of the 13-93B3 glass within 6 weeks. In comparison, the von Kossa-positive area due 
to the conversion of the 13-93 scaffold was 12  2% at 6 weeks and 15  5% at 12 weeks. 
   
 
Fig. 6. (a) Percent total von Kossa-positive area and (b) percent von Kossa-positive area with 
new bone subtracted in rat calvarial defects implanted with the four groups of scaffolds at 6 and 
12 weeks: 13-93, 13-93 with a thin layer of 13-93B3 (thin layer), 13-93 with a thick layer of 
13-93B3 (thick layer), and 13-93B3. *Significant difference between groups (p<0.05). 
 
The results of this study for the conversion of the scaffolds to HA are in agreement with the 
results of previous in vitro and in vivo studies that showed a more rapid degradation and 
conversion of borate 13-93B3 glass when compared to silicate 13-93 glass [14ࡁ17]. The in vivo 
results for bone regeneration obtained in this study are different from the results of a previous 
study [16] that showed a better capacity of 13-93B3 glass to support bone renegeration in rat 
calvarial defects when compared to 13-93 scaffolds. However, the results of the present study 
confirm those of a previous study [17] which showed a decreasing capacity of the scaffolds to 
regenerate bone with increasing amount of 13-93B3 glass in the scaffold. In those two previous 
studies [16, 17], the scaffolds has a fibrous microstructure composed of a random arrangement of 
thermally-bonded short glass fibers. 
The scaffolds in the present study had the same grid-like microstructure. In particular, the 
62
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
microstructure of the 13-93 and 13-93B3 scaffolds was identical (Fig. 1). Consequently, 
differences in microstructure cannot account for the lower capacity of the 13-93B3 scaffolds to 
regenerate bone observed in this study. The decrease in bone regeneration with increasing 
13-93B3 glass in the scaffold (Fig. 4) suggests that the borate glass might have a reduced 
capacity to regenerate bone. One factor that might account for the lower capacity of the 13-93B3 
scaffolds to regenerate bone is toxicity resulting from high concentrations of boron released from 
the scaffolds. The fast degradation of the 13-93B3 glass leads to rapid release of high 
concentrations of boron in vivo. This could adversely affect cell viability initially which could 
have an effect on subsequent cellular and tissue reactions and, eventually, on bone formation.  
The processing steps used to create the grid-like 13-93 and 13-93B3 scaffolds were not 
identical. Because of the low reactivity of 13-93 glass, the paste used for robotic deposition of 
the 13-93 scaffolds was prepared using an aqueous Pluronic F-127 solution. In comparison, an 
organic-based paste containing ethanol and ethyl cellulose was used for creating the 13-93B3 
scaffolds in order to prevent degradation of the glass. While the subsequent thermal treatment of 
the scaffolds was performed to remove these organic additives as completely as possible, 
inevitably trace amounts of carbonaceous residue resulted in the 13-93B3 scaffolds having a 
darker color than the 13-93 scaffolds (Fig. 1). It is unclear whether the trace amount of 
carbonaceous residue in the 13-93B3 glass could be toxic to cells and tissues. However, the 
similarity in the trends for bone regeneration between this study and a previous study [17] in 
which fibrous scaffolds were fabricated by thermal bonding (without additives) indicates that 
trace amounts of carbonaceous residue in the 13-93B3 glass were not a major factor.        
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Bioactive glass scaffolds with a grid-like microstructure, composed of silicate 13-93 glass 
with varying amounts of borate 13-93B3 glass (0ࡁ100%) were created by robotic deposition and 
evaluated in vitro and in vivo. The compressive strength and elastic modulus of the as-fabricated 
scaffolds decreased with increasing amount of 13-93B3 glass in the scaffolds. When implanted 
in rat calvarial defects in vivo, the scaffolds showed a decreasing capacity to regenerate bone 
with increasing volume fraction of 13-93B3 glass in the scaffolds. The percent new bone in the 
defects implanted with the 13-93 scaffolds (23 ± 4 % at 6 weeks and 28 ± 8% at 12 weeks) was 
significantly higher than in the defects implanted with the 13-93B3 scaffolds (6 ± 4 % at 6 weeks 
and 9 ± 7 % at 12 weeks). While the 13-93 glass was only partially converted to HA after 12 
weeks in vivo, the 13-93B3 glass was almost fully converted within 6 weeks. The lower capacity 
of the 13-93B3 scaffolds to support bone regeneration might be related to the high boron 
concentration released from the rapidly-converting glass.    
 
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Center for Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology, the Shanghai Committee of 
Science and Technology, China (Grant No. 12JC1408500) and National Natural Science 
Foundation, China (Grant Nos. 51072133 and 1372170).  
 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
63
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
REFERENCES  
[1] 
P. V. Giannoudis, H. Dinopoulos, and E. Tsiridis, “Bone Substitutes: An Update,” Injury, 
36S, S20ࡁ37 (2005). 
[2] 
C. Laurencin, Y. Khan, and S. F. El-Amin, “Bone Graft Substitutes,” Expert Rev. Med. 
Devices, 3, 49ࡁ57 (2006). 
[3] 
J. C. Fernyhough, J. J. Schimandle, M. C. Weigel, C. C. Edwards, and A. M. Levine, 
“Chronic Donor Site Pain Complicating Bone Graft Harvesting from the Posterior Iliac 
Crest for Spinal Fusion,” Spine, 17, 1474-80 (1992). 
[4] 
S. A. Wolfe, “Autogenous Bone Grafts versus Alloplastic Material in Maxillofacial 
Surgery,” Clin. Plast. Surg., 9, 539ࡁ40 (1982). 
[5]  L. L. Hench, “Bioceramics,” J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 81, 1705ࡁ28 (1998). 
[6] 
M. N. Rahaman, D. E. Day, B. S. Bal, Q. Fu, S. B. Jung, L. F. Bonewald, and A. P. Tomsia, 
“Bioactive Glass in Tissue Engineering,” Acta Biomater., 7, 2355ࡁ73 (2011). 
[7] 
J. R. Jones, “Review of Bioactive Glass: From Hench to Hybrids,” Acta Biomater., 9, 
4457ࡁ86 (2013). 
[8]  Q. Fu, M. N. Rahaman, B. S. Bal, R. F. Brown, and D. E. Day, “Mechanical and In Vitro 
Performance of 13–93 Bioactive Glass Scaffolds Prepared by a Polymer Foam Replication 
Technique,” Acta Biomater., 4, 1854ࡁ64 (2008). 
[9] 
T. S. Huang, M. N. Rahaman, N. D. Doiphode, M. C. Leu, B. S. Bal, and D. E. Day, 
“Porous and Strong Bioactive Glass (13-93) Scaffolds Fabricated by Freeze Extrusion 
Technique,” Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 31, 1482ࡁ9 (2011). 
[10] Q. Fu, E. Saiz, and A. P. Tomsia, “Bioinspired Strong and Highly Porous Glass Scaffolds,” 
Adv. Funct. Mater., 21, 1058ࡁ63 (2011). 
[11] X. Liu, M. N. Rahaman, G. E. Hilmas, and B. S. Bal, “Mechanical Properties of Bioactive 
Glass (13-93) Scaffolds Fabricated by Robotic Deposition for Structural Bone Repair,” 
Acta Biomater., 9, 7025ࡁ34 (2013). 
[12] W. Huang, M. N. Rahaman, D. E. Day, and Y. Li, “Mechanisms for Converting Bioactive 
Silicate, Borate, and Borosilicate Glasses to Hydroxyapatite in Dilute Phosphate Solution,” 
Phys Chem Glasses-B, 47, 647ࡁ58 (2006). 
[13] W. Huang, D. E. Day, K. Kittiratanapiboon, and M. N. Rahaman, “Kinetics and 
Mechanisms of the Conversion of Silicate (45S5), Borate, and Borosilicate Glasses to 
Hydroxyapatite in Dilute Phosphate Solutions,” J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med., 17, 583ࡁ96 
(2006). 
[14] A. Yao, D. Wang, W. Huang, Q. Fu, M. N. Rahaman, and D. E. Day, “In Vitro Bioactive 
Characteristics of Borate-based Glasses with Controllable Degradation Behavior,” J. Am. 
Ceram. Soc., 90, 303ࡁ6 (2007). 
[15] Q. Fu, M. N. Rahaman, B. S. Bal, L. F. Bonewald, K. Kuroki, and R. F. Brown, “Silicate, 
Borosilicate, and Borate Bioactive Glass Scaffolds with Controllable Degradation Rate for 
Bone Tissue Engineering Applications. II. In Vitro and In Vivo Biological Evaluation,” J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res. A, 95, 172ࡁ9 (2010). 
[16] L. Bi, S. Jung, D. Day, K. Neidig, V. Dusevich, D. Eick, and L. F. Bonewald, “Evaluation 
of Bone Regeneration, Angiogenesis, and Hydroxyapatite Conversion in Critical-sized Rat 
64
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
In Vivo Evaluation of Scaffolds with a Grid-Like Microstructure
Calvarial Defects Implanted with Bioactive Glass Scaffolds,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A, 
100, 3267ࡁ75 (2012). 
[17] Y. Gu, W. Huang, M. N. Rahaman, and D. E. Day, “Bone Regeneration in Rat Calvarial 
Defects Implanted with Fibrous Scaffolds Composed of a Mixture of Silicate and Borate 
Bioactive Glasses,” Acta Biomater., 9, 9126ࡁ36 (2013). 
[18] A. M. Deliormanló and M. N. Rahaman, “Direct-write Assembly of Silicate and Borate 
Bioactive Glass Scaffolds for Bone Repair,” J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 32, 3637ࡁ46 (2012). 
[19] Q. Fu, M. N. Rahaman, H. Fu, and X. Liu, “Silicate, Borosilicate, and Borate Bioactive 
Glass Scaffolds with Controllable Degradation Rate for Bone tissue Engineering 
Applications. I. Preparation and In Vitro Degradation,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A, 95, 
164ࡁ71 (2010). 
 
 
 
 
65
OSTEOCONDUCTIVE AND OSTEOINDUCTIVE IMPLANTS COMPOSED OF HOLLOW 
HYDROXYAPATITE MICROSPHERES 
 
Mohamed N. Rahaman1,*, Wei Xiao1, Yongxing Liu1, and B. Sonny Bal2 
1Department of Materials Science and Engineering and Center for Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri 65409, USA 
2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA  
*Corresponding author (rahaman@mst.edu) 
  
ABSTRACT 
The repair of bone defects resulting from trauma, periodontal disease and congenital 
diseases is a common clinical problem. Autogenous bone grafts are the gold standard for 
treatment and allografts are alternatives but they suffer from limitations. Synthetic bone graft 
substitutes are typically osteoconductive but they lack the osteogenic cells and osteoinductive 
growths factors present in autologous bone. Consequently, they commonly require the addition 
of cells or growth factors to enhance bone regeneration. However, concerns have been expressed 
about the supraphysiological doses of bone morphogenetic proteins (such as BMP2) required for 
bone regeneration at a clinically acceptable rate. We have been developing hollow hydroxy- 
apatite (HA) microspheres as a bioactive and osteoconductive carrier for BMP2 in bone 
regeneration. The microspheres have a customizable diameter, surface area, hollow core and 
mesoporous shell wall. When loaded with BMP2, the HA microspheres showed a significant 
capacity to induce bone growth in rat calvarial defects within 3 to 6 weeks. Removing a segment 
of the shell from the hollow HA microspheres resulted in the creation of “open” microspheres 
that showed the interior concave surface of the shell wall. The open HA microspheres showed 
osteoinductive-like properties based on the microconcave geometry of the interior surface of the 
shell wall. In this article, the characteristics of the hollow HA micro- spheres, their ability to 
serve as a carrier for BMP2 and their capacity to regenerate bone in a standard osseous defect 
model are reviewed. These hollow HA microspheres, closed or open, are promising 
osteoconductive and osteoinductive implants for regenerating bone in periodontal, craniofacial 
and non-loaded musculoskeletal defects. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Bone defects resulting from trauma, malignancy, infection, and congenital disease are a 
common occurrence in orthopaedic, craniofacial and dental practice [1]. Clinically, these defects 
can be reconstructed through the use of various bone grafts such as autologous bone grafts, 
allografts and biocompatible synthetic biomaterials [1ࡁ3]. Autologous bone grafts, the gold 
standard for treatment, heal reliably as they contain osteoinductive growth factors and osteogenic 
cells and they provide a structural scaffold. However, autografts suffer from problems such as 
limited tissue availability, increased surgery time, additional pain and cosmetic imperfection at 
the donor site [4, 5]. Allogenic bone, the most widely used bone graft, can induce moderate 
healing due to its preserved osteoinductivity. However, allografts are costly, have unpredictable 
healing to bone and adverse immune reactions, and they increase the risk of disease transference 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
66
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
[6]. Synthetic bone grafts have advantages such as unlimited supply, consistent quality, safety 
and good tissue tolerance but they commonly function merely as bioinert or osteoconductive 
implants [1ࡁ3, 7ࡁ11]. Although encouraging results have been reported [10ࡁ12], the use of 
synthetic bone grafts by themselves commonly fails to produce sufficient bone formation in a 
clinically relevant time [11, 13]. Adding autologous bone [11, 13ࡁ15] or osteogenic growth 
factors [16, 17] to synthetic grafts is often needed to achieve reliable reconstruction of bone.  
 
Osteogenic bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) can induce robust bone formation [18]. 
BMPs such as (BMP2) have been used successfully in orthopedic repair and their applications in 
periodontal and craniofacial bone regeneration are being actively investigated [19ࡁ21]. BMPs 
are commonly delivered by biodegradable or osteoconductive carriers [3, 22ࡁ24], such as 
collagen, biodegradable synthetic polymers such as poly(lactic acid) (PLA), poly(glycolic acid) 
PGA and their copolymers (PLGA), calcium phosphate bioceramics such as hydroxyapatite 
(HA), beta-tricalcium phosphate ( -TCP) and biphasic calcium phosphate (BCP), and bioactive 
glasses. The BMP release kinetics from the carrier and the retention of the BMP biological 
activity are critically important for successful bone induction [18]. Carriers with good 
osteoconductive and bioactive properties are also desirable for bone repair as they bond directly 
to the original (host) bone [18]. 
Collagen has been used for several years as a carrier for BMP2 in orthopedic practice [1ࡁ3]. 
However, collagen is not osteoconductive and collagen carriers release the bulk of their BMPs 
initially, followed by a more gradual release thereafter [25]. Consequently, BMPs are often 
effective only when used in supraphysiological doses in collagen which has resulted in 
heightened concerns about adverse biological effects, such as greater risk of malignancy, ectopic 
bone formation and osteolysis [26ࡁ29]. The reduction of a high initial dose could make the use 
of BMPs clinically safer. Decreasing the typical initial burst release and extending the sustained 
release of BMPs by improved design of the carrier is a desirable approach [23, 30]. The 
biodegradable polymers PLA, PGA and PLGA have been applied clinically in fracture fixation 
and they have been researched as carriers for BMPs because of the possibility for controlled 
release [3]. The degradation rate of those polymers and, therefore, the BMP release kinetics can 
be varied by changing their material properties such as composition and geometry. However, 
PLA, PGA and PLGA are not osteoconductive and there is a concern is that a large proportion of 
the BMP does not retain its activity after release from those carriers [31].    
 
The calcium phosphate bioceramics HA, -TCP and BCP have been used clinically in bone 
repair and augmentation since the 1980s [32ࡁ35]. They are bioactive and osteoconductive but 
they are generally not osteoinductive [36, 37]. One of the most emphasized differences between 
HA and -TCP is their relative degradation rates [38]. Synthetic HA is almost non-degradable 
while -TCP degrades (resorbs) far faster. The calcium phosphate ceramics have a strong affinity 
for binding and concentrating proteins which make them suitable carriers for growth factors such 
as BMP2 [36, 39]. Several studies have shown that the combination of porous particles, granules 
and scaffolds of calcium phosphate bioceramics with BMPs enhances osteogenesis in animal 
models when compared to the bioceramics alone [40ࡁ45]. However, the properties of the 
bioceramic such as porosity, pore size, pore interconnectivity and degradation rate can have a 
marked effect on osteogenesis. The non-resorbable property of synthetic HA can severely limit 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
67
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
BMP release and, therefore, the ability to stimulate osteogenesis [36, 46ࡁ49]. 
Calcium phosphate bioceramics such as HA, -TCP and BCP have been reported to have the 
ability to induce bone formation in non-bony sites without the addition of osteogenic growth 
factors [50ࡁ53]. Since the osteoinductivity was observed in some calcium phosphate bioceramics 
but not in others, these materials were described as having “intrinsic” osteoinductivity [37]. This 
osteoinductive property has been attributed to a variety of factors such as the chemical 
composition, surface topography, geometry and pore characteristics of the biomaterial [39, 
54ࡁ57]. Macroporosity, mesoporosity and concavity of the macropore surface appear to be 
important characteristics because they allow entrapment and concentration of circulating 
osteogenic growth factors (such as bone morphogenetic proteins, BMPs) and osteoprogenitor 
cells already present in the defect site in vivo. 
 
In the last few years, we have been developing a hollow HA microsphere technology to meet 
the need for improved synthetic bone graft substitutes [58ࡁ61]. The HA microspheres have a 
unique combination of properties that can be customized, such as microsphere and hollow core 
diameter, high surface area, mesoporous shell wall and degradation rate. By removing a segment 
of the shell from the hollow HA microspheres, we have created “open” HA microspheres that 
showed the interior concave surface of the shell wall. When necessary, the intact hollow HA 
microspheres are referred to as “closed” microspheres while the microspheres with a segment of 
the shell removed are referred to as “open” microspheres. In this article, the results of our 
previous studies on the preparation and characteristics of hollow HA microspheres, their ability 
serve as a carrier for BMP2 and their capacity to heal bone defects in a standard small animal 
model are reviewed. Then our recent results for the capacity of the open HA microspheres 
(without growth factors) to support the osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSCs) in vitro and to induce bone formation in vivo are discussed.      
  
PREPARATION OF HOLLOW HA MICROSPHERES 
Hollow HA microspheres are prepared by a novel glass conversion process near room 
temperature (Fig. 1), as described in detail elsewhere [58]. Briefly, solid microspheres of a borate 
glass (composition 15.0 CaO, 10.6 Li2O, 74.4 B2O3; wt%) are reacted in an aqueous phosphate 
(K2HPO4) solution. The temperature, concentration and pH of the solution influence the 
characteristics of the hollow HA microspheres [58]. The hollow microspheres described in this 
study were prepared at 37 C in a 0.02 M K2HPO4 solution with a pH = 9.0. Hollow HA 
microspheres of diameter 106ࡁ150 and 150ࡁ250 μm were commonly used in our previous 
studies but microspheres of diameter <100 μm to 1000 μm can be readily prepared. The 
reaction time varies from 2 days to 7 days, depending on the diameter of the starting glass 
microspheres (100ࡁ1000 μm). As the glass degrades, the released Ca2+ ions react with the 
phosphate ions from the solution to form an amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) product on the 
surface of the microspheres [58]. Further reaction leads to the growth of the ACP layer inward 
and crystallization of the ACP phase to HA until the reaction is completed. The external diameter 
of the HA microspheres is equal to the original diameter of the starting glass microspheres but 
the diameter of the hollow core can be varied by changing the glass composition and the reaction 
conditions (such as the temperature and the concentration of the phosphate solution). 
68
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram showing the main steps in converting solid CaO-Li2O-B2O3 glass 
microspheres to hollow HA microspheres. 
               
 
  
Fig. 2. SEM images of (a) hollow HA microspheres (106ࡁ150 μm), and (b) the cross section of 
an HA microsphere showing the hollow core. (Inset: High magnification SEM image of surface 
of the nanostructured mesoporous HA shell. Bar = 1 μm). 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF HOLLOW HA MICROSPHERES 
As-prepared hollow HA microspheres of external diameter 106ࡁ150 μm are described in this 
article. The microspheres have a nearly stoichiometric HA composition, a surface area of 102 
m2/g, a hollow core that is six-tenths the external diameter, a mesoporous shell (pore size = 
10ࡁ20 nm) and a rupture strength of 11  6 MPa. As described in detail elsewhere [59], the 
characteristics of the as-prepared microspheres can be modified by changing the reaction 
conditions and by using a thermal treatment. By adding varying amounts of carbonate ions to the 
phosphate solution used in the glass conversion process (Fig. 1), hollow microspheres composed 
of carbonate-substituted HA with controllable amounts of carbonate content (0 10 wt%) and, 
hence, degradation rate can be prepared. Heating the as-prepared HA microspheres above 200 
C results leads to changes in the microstructural characteristics of the HA shell. At temperatures 
of 500ࡁ600 C, the HA particles and the pores in the shell become coarser (but there is no 
measurable reduction in the total porosity), resulting in a reduction in the surface area (and, 
hence, the degradation rate) and an increase in the rupture strength. At higher temperatures, the 
HA particles continue to coarsen but the porosity of the shell decreases due to sintering, leading 
to a further decrease in the surface area and an increase in the rupture strength. Eventually at 
temperatures above 800ࡁ900 C, the shell becomes dense due to sintering. In general, the 
reaction conditions used in the glass conversion process and thermal treatment of the as-prepared 
microspheres can be used to customize the characteristics of the HA microspheres. 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
69
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
HOLLOW HA MICROSPHERES AS A CARRIER FOR BMP2 
Hollow HA microspheres (106ࡁ150 μm) were loaded with BMP2 (Shenandoah Biotech- 
nology Inc., Warwick, PA) and used to study the release kinetics of BMP2 in vitro. The 
procedures are described in detail elsewhere [61]. Briefly, 10 mg of microspheres were placed in 
a 1 ml micro-centrifuge tube, and 10 μl of BMP2 solution (formed by dissolving 10 μg BMP2 in 
100 ml sterile citric acid at pH = 3.0) was pipetted on to the microspheres. A small vacuum was 
applied to replace the air in the microspheres with the BMP2 solution. Then, the BMP2- loaded 
microspheres were dried overnight at 4 C. Some of the BMP2-loaded HA microspheres were 
coated with a biodegradable polymer (PLGA) to modify the release of the BMP2 from the 
microspheres. In the coating process, 20 μl of a PLGA solution in chloroform was added to 10 
mg of BMP2-loaded HA microspheres in a centrifuge tube, and the system was dried at 4 C for 
24 h. Two different concentrations of the PLGA solutions were used (50 mg/ml and 200 mg/ml) 
to create coatings with different thicknesses. 
To measure the release on BMP2 from the microspheres, 500 μl of a sterile solution 
composed of equal volumes of fetal bovine serum (FBS) and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 
was added to the 10 mg microspheres in micro-centrifuge tubes and the samples were incubated 
at 37 C. At selected times, the FBS/PBS solution was removed for testing, and replaced with 
fresh solution. Control samples containing a known amount of BMP2 in a buffer were also 
incubated at 37 C. The amount of BMP2 present in the releasing medium was measured using 
an ELISA kit.  
 
Fig. 3. Cumulative amount of BMP2 released from hollow HA microspheres into an FBS/PBS 
buffer medium in vitro as a function of time. The data are shown for the uncoated HA 
microspheres loaded with BMP2, and the BMP2-loaded microspheres coated with solutions 
composed of 50 mg/ml PLGA and 200 mg/ml. (From Ref. 61) 
 
 
Figure 3 shows the average cumulative amount of BMP2 released from the uncoated and 
PLGA- coated HA microspheres into the medium. The uncoated microspheres showed an initial 
“burst” release at 1 h, followed by a more continuous release at longer times. In comparison, 
there appeared to be a delay in the release of BMP2 from the microspheres coated with the 
PLGA solution. The amount of BMP2 released from the coated microspheres at 1 h was 
70
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
significantly smaller than that for the uncoated microspheres but it became higher at day 1 and 
day 3. Thereafter, the amount of BMP2 released was lower or comparable to that for the 
uncoated microspheres. The cumulative amount of BMP2 released at any time decreased with 
increasing amount of the PLGA coating.  
A distinct feature of the results was the low amount of BMP2 released from the 
microspheres. When the experiments were terminated after 14 days, the cumulative amount of 
BMP2 released, determined as a fraction of the amount initially loaded into the microspheres, 
was 1.8%, 1.5%, and 1.0%, respectively, for the uncoated microspheres, the microspheres coated 
with the 50 mg/ml solution and the microspheres coated with the 200 mg/ml solution. BMP2 has 
a high affinity for HA and, consequently, its release rate from HA in vitro is often low. The 
adsorbed BMP2 is strongly immobilized on the surface of the HA by electrostatic and other 
interactions (such as hydrogen bonding) which makes it difficult for the BMP2 to be displaced 
from the HA surface by competitive adsorption from other proteins [62ࡁ64]. However, the 
amount released from the hollow HA microspheres used in this study was still lower than those 
observed from more conventional HA materials [63, 64].  
While a few factors can contribute to the low BMP2 release rate, the unique structural 
features of the hollow HA microspheres, such as the high-surface-area mesoporous shell, might 
be the most important. The amount of BMP2 initially loaded into the microspheres was <1% of 
the theoretical amount of BMP2 that can be adsorbed onto the surface area of the HA 
microspheres used in this study [64]. Becuase of the strong affinity of HA for BMP2, the 
desorbed BMP2 could be readily re-adsorbed on the largely free HA surface, which would 
markedly reduce the amount of BMP2 released into the medium. The tortuous mesopores of the 
HA shell could also make the migration of BMP2 from the hollow core or from the pores to the 
external surface difficult because of the large surface area available for adsorption.  
A higher release rate of BMP2 from the microspheres can be expected in vivo because of a 
higher degradation rate of the HA due to cell-mediated degradation in addition to 
dissolution-mediated degradation [65, 66] and the higher solubility of proteins in vivo. If 
required, the release of BMP2 from the as-prepared microspheres can be improved by increasing 
the dissolution (degradation) rate of the HA which is dependent on the composition and structure 
of the HA [38]. The HA microspheres used in these studies had a nearly stoichiometric 
composition and, consequently, a low degradation rate. Recently, we have prepared hollow HA 
microspheres with varying amounts of carbonate substitution which show a higher degradation 
rate. Those microspheres are being evaluated in vitro and in vivo.    
The rate at which the BMP2 is released with time is relevant to the use of these hollow HA 
microspheres as a carrier in bone regeneration. In particular, a high initial burst release of BMP2 
has often been observed from HA carrier materials [67]. A burst release of BMP2 can induce 
inflammatory reactions which are believed to be beneficial for promoting bone formation, but it 
can also cause significant adverse biological effects. While a reduction in the BMP2 dose 
delivered in vivo could reduce those side effects, a high dose is often required to induce 
significant bone formation [26, 68]. 
Coating the BMP2-loaded microspheres with PLGA is effective in reducing the amount of 
BMP2 released during the first hour when compared to the uncoated microspheres (Fig. 3) [61]. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
71
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
The amount of BMP2 released from the coated microspheres was 4 to 5 times lower than that for 
the uncoated microspheres. Subsequently, the amount of BMP2 released from the microspheres 
coated with the 50 mg/ml PLGA solution increased, and the cumulative amount of BMP2 
released was not significantly different from that of the uncoated microspheres. In comparison, 
the amount of BMP2 released from the microspheres coated with the 200 mg/ml solution 
remained at a much lower value, presumably because the larger PLGA coverage provided a 
greater barrier to the release of BMP2. The results showed the feasibility of combining the 
hollow HA microspheres with a biodegradable polymer coating to control the BMP2 release 
profile. However, it is expected that optimization of the coating will depend on the clinical 
application. For example, the use of a much higher BMP2 dose (1500 ug/ml), as in some clinical 
applications [69], will require the coating thickness to be adjusted accordingly in order to 
achieve optimum control of the release profile.  
 
HOLLOW HA MICROSPHERES AS IMPLANTS FOR BONE REGENERATION 
Hollow HA microspheres were implanted in calvarial defects (4.6 mm) of Sprague Dawley 
rats to evaluate their capacity to support bone regeneration [61]. Implants composed of 
microspheres (diameter = 106ࡁ150 μm) without BMP2 and microspheres loaded with BMP2 (1 
μg/defect) were evaluated. At 6 weeks, the calvarial samples, including the defect sites with 
surrounding bone and tissue, were sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and 
the von Kossa technique using routine histological techniques. Histomorphometric analysis was 
carried out using optical images of the stained sections and the ImageJ software (National 
Institutes of Health, USA). The percent new bone formed in the defect sites implanted with the 
scaffolds was determined from the H&E stained sections as a fraction of the total defect area.  
  
Fig. 4. H&E stained sections of rat calvarial defect implanted for 6 weeks with (a) hollow HA 
microspheres (106 150 m), and (b) hollow HA microspheres loaded with BMP2 (1 g/defect). 
(HB = host bone; NB = new bone). (From Ref. 61) 
 
The majority of the new bone formed in the defects implanted with the hollow HA 
microspheres (without growth factor) was osteoconductive in nature. New bone infiltrated the 
pores between the microspheres from the edge of the defect and grew along the dural side of the 
defect (Fig. 4a). Loading the hollow HA microspheres (106ࡁ150 μm) with BMP2 was effective 
in stimulating osteoinductive bone formation (Fig. 4b). New bone formed within the pores of the 
microspheres and bridged the defect within the six-week implantation period. The percent new 
formed in the defects implanted with the BMP2-loaded microspheres (43 
 6%) was 
significantly higher than that (17  10%) in the defects implanted with the microspheres without 
BMP2. The results indicate that these hollow HA microspheres are a promising osteoconductive 
72
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
carrier for BMP2 to stimulate osteoinductive bone growth. The BMP2 dose in the present study 
(1 μg/defect) was approximately in the mid-range of values used in other studies with this small 
animal model [70]. However, it is not clear whether a lower BMP2 dose can be equally effective 
in stimulating bone regeneration.  
 
CREATION OF OPEN HA MICROSPHERES 
Open HA microspheres have been created by grinding the hollow HA microspheres to 
remove a segment of the shell, as shown schematically in Fig. 5a. Hollow HA microspheres 
(106ࡁ150 μm), prepared as described earlier, were placed at the bottom of a plastic mold to form 
a single layer (e.g., by pouring the microspheres into the mold and vibrating the mold slightly). 
Then water was poured into the mold to a suitable depth to cover the microspheres and the 
system was frozen. After grinding the bottom surface of the frozen material on 1200 grit 
sandpaper in a cold chamber at 4 C, the microspheres were released from the ice by immersing 
the system in water at room temperature. The microspheres were collected, washed 3 times with 
water, then 3 times with ethanol, and dried for >12 hours at 90 C.  
 
 
 
Fig. 5. (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the method used for preparing open HA microspheres 
from (closed) hollow HA microspheres; (b) SEM image of a sample composed of closed 
microspheres and 25% and open microspheres (arrow). Small debris (arrowhead) present in the 
mixture sample can be removed by sieving. (Bar = 250 μm) 
  
The difference between the open and closed HA microspheres was geometrical in nature; the 
open HA microspheres showed the interior concave surface of the shell. Figure 5b shows an 
SEM image of HA microspheres composed of closed and open microspheres. The mixture was 
estimated to contain 25% open microspheres but mixtures with varying amounts of open 
microspheres (0ࡁ50%) have been created. Because of the size range of the closed microspheres 
(106ࡁ150 μm) used in this study, it was not possible to grind off the same amount of the shell 
from each microsphere. There are also residual HA debris in the mixture. Narrowing the size 
range of the starting hollow HA microspheres and sieving the mixture after the grinding step 
should improve the quality of the open HA microspheres formed by this method.  
 
OSTEOGENIC EFFECT OF OPEN HA MICROSPHERES IN VITRO 
 
The osteogenic effect of the open microspheres was assessed from their ability to support 
the differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells (rMSCs) in vitro. HA microspheres (106ࡁ150 
μm) containing 0, 25% and 50% open microspheres were used in order to determine the effect 
(a)
(b)
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
73
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
of the open microsphere content on cell differentiation. GIBCO® rMSCs (Sprague Dawley) (Life 
Technologies, NY) were propagated in maintaining medium composed of low-glucose 
Dulbecco's modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with GlutaMAX™-I, 10% MSC-qualified fetal 
bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies, NY). 
Cell culture was performed in osteogenic medium composed of the maintaining medium 
supplemented with 50 μM magnesium L-ascorbic acid-phosphate and 10 mM beta-glycero- 
phosphate (both from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). No osteoinductive agents were added in 
order to distinguish the intrinsic osteogenic properties of the open HA microspheres [71, 72]. The 
cells (2 ×105) were seeded on 10 mg of HA microspheres placed in a 5 ml sterile polystyrene 
tube. (This mass of HA microspheres is the amount used in the in vivo experiments described 
later). Cells suspended in 100 μl culture medium were dropped onto the microspheres, gently 
mixed, allowed to attach for 3 h in a humidified CO2 incubator at 37 C. Then 3 ml of culture 
medium was gently added to each tube. The cells were cultured for 14 days (n = 3 per group), 
with half of the medium replaced with fresh medium every 3ࡁ4 days. 
 
Fig. 6. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity of rat MSCs cultured for 14 days on hollow HA 
microspheres (106ࡁ150 μm) containing different amounts of open HA microspheres. 
 
 
Cell viability and proliferation was assessed using the CellTiter-Blue® Cell Viability Assay 
(Promega; Madison, WI) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Osteogenic differentiation of the 
cells was assessed from their alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, measured using a SensoLyte® 
pNPP Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit following the manufacturer’s manual (AnaSpec, Fremont, 
CA). The results (Fig. 6) showed that the open HA microspheres can promote osteogenesis. The 
rMSCs seeded on the microspheres containing 25% and 50% open HA microspheres showed 
significantly better ALP activity than the microspheres composed of closed HA microspheres 
only (control group). Furtherm0ore, the increase in ALP activity increased with the amount of 
the open HA microspheres. 
 
OSTEOINDUCTIVE-LIKE PROPERTIES OF OPEN HA MICROSPHERES IN VIVO   
 
To evaluate the capacity of the open HA microspheres to promote osteogenesis in vivo, 
hollow HA microspheres (106ࡁ150 μm) containing 0, 25% and 50% open microspheres were 
implanted in rat calvarial defects for 6 weeks. The animal surgery and histologic processing were 
74
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
the same as those described earlier for implants composed of closed HA microspheres. New 
bone formation in the defects implanted with the closed HA microspheres ( 0% open 
microspheres) was limited to the periphery (edge) and on the dural side of the defects, as 
described earlier (see Fig. 4a). Bone was rarely observed within the closed microspheres or in the 
pores between the closed microspheres. The closed microspheres were filled with unidentified 
materials that were stained weak pink, presumably extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins that 
penetrated the mesoporous shell and accumulated in the hollow core.  
 
 
Fig. 7. (a) Optical image of H&E stained section of rat calvarial defect implanted for 6 weeks 
with hollow HA microspheres containing 50% open microspheres. (b) Higher magnification 
image of the boxed area shown in (a).       
 
Defects implanted with the HA microspheres containing 25 and 50% open microspheres 
showed considerable bone formation in the many of the micro-concave regions of the open 
microspheres (Fig. 7). The amount of new bone within the microspheres apparently increased 
with increasing amount of open microspheres in the implants. The regions between the 
microspheres were filled with cell-rich connective tissues, similar to the tissues found between 
the closed HA microspheres. As these open HA microspheres have the same composition as the 
closed microspheres, their osteoinductive-like properties in vivo resulted essentially from the 
micro-concavity of their shell. As discussed previously [54ࡁ57], a micro-concave surface could 
allow entrapment and concentration of circulating osteogenic growth factors such as BMPs and 
osteoprogenitor cells already present in the defect site in vivo, resulting in the better capacity to 
induce new bone formation within the open HA microspheres. 
When compared to other intrinsically osteoinductive biomaterials reported in the literature, 
these open HA microspheres have the advantages of ease of fabrication, low cost, and reasonable 
large-scale production for routine clinical use. However, in common with other intrinsically 
osteoinductive biomaterials [71, 73], new bone formation is limited to within the micro-concave 
geometry. Consequently, the effectiveness of these open HA microspheres remains to be 
improved in order to achieve greater and more significant bone formation. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Hollow hydroxyapatite (HA) microspheres are showing promising results for use as implants 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
75
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
in bone repair. In addition to being bioactive and osteoconductive, hollow HA microspheres have 
an attractive combination of customizable properties such as high surface area, external and 
hollow core diameters, mesoporous shell wall and degradation rate. When loaded with BMP2, 
hollow HA microspheres have the capacity to induce significant bone formation in a standard 
osseous defect model within 3 to 6 weeks. Removing a segment of the shell from the hollow HA 
microspheres resulted in the creation of “open” microspheres that showed the microconcave 
interior surface of the shell. The open HA microspheres showed a significantly better ability to 
promote osteogenic differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells in vitro when compared to the 
“closed” HA microspheres. When implanted in rat calvarial defects in vivo, the open HA 
microspheres (without osteogenic growth factors or cells) showed osteoinductive-like properties. 
Considerable bone formation was found in the micro-concave regions of the open microspheres, 
presumably as a result of the concentration of local growth factors and osteoprogenitor cells 
within those micro-concave regions. These hollow HA microspheres, closed or open, are 
promising osteoconductive and osteoinductive implants for regenerating bone in periodontal, 
craniofacial and non-loaded musculoskeletal defects.  
 
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the Center for Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1] 
Giannoudis PV, Dinopoulos H, Tsiridis E. Bone substitutes: an update. Injury 2005;36S; S20ࡁ37. 
[2] 
Laurencin C, Khan Y, El-Amin SF. Bone graft substitutes. Expert Rev Med Devices 2006;3:49ࡁ57. 
[3] 
Bauer TW, Muschler GF. Bone graft materials. Clin Orthop Rel Res 2000;371:10ࡁ27. 
[4] 
Fernyhough JC, Schimandle JJ, Weigel MC, Edwards CC, Levine AM. Chronic donor site pain 
complicating bone graft harvesting from the posterior iliac crest for spinal fusion. Spine 
1992;17:1474ࡁ80. 
[5] 
Dahlin C, Johansson A. Iliac crest autogenous bone graft versus alloplastic graft and guided bone 
regeneration in the reconstruction of atrophic maxillae: a 5-year retrospective study on 
cost-effectiveness and clinical outcome. Clin Implant Dent R 2011;13:305ࡁ10. 
[6] 
Wolfe SA. Autogenous bone grafts versus alloplastic material in maxillofacial surgery. Clin Plast 
Surg 1982;9:539ࡁ40. 
[7] 
Froum SJ, Kushner L, Scopp IW, Stahl SS. Human clinical and histologic responses to Durapatite 
implants in intraosseous lesions. Case reports. J Periodontol 1982;53:719ࡁ25. 
[8]  Stahl SS, Froum SJ. Histologic and clinical responses to porous hydroxylapatite implants in human 
periodontal defects. Three to twelve months postimplantation. J Periodontol 1987;58:689ࡁ95. 
[9] 
Tadjoedin ES, de Lange GL, Holzmann PJ, Kulper L, Burger EH. Histological observations on 
biopsies harvested following sinus floor elevation using a bioactive glass material of narrow size 
range. Clin Oral Implan Res 2000;11:334ࡁ44. 
[10] Turunen T, Peltola J, Yli-Urpo A, Happonen RP. Bioactive glass granules as a bone adjunctive 
material in maxillary sinus floor augmentation. Clin Oral Implan Res 2004;15:135ࡁ41. 
[11]  Rickert D, Slater JJ, Meijer HJ, Vissink A, Raghoebar GM. Maxillary sinus lift with solely 
autogenous bone compared to a combination of autogenous bone and growth factors or (solely) 
76
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
bone substitutes. A systematic review. Int J Oral Max Surg 2012;41:160ࡁ7. 
[12] Scarano A, Degidi M, Iezzi G, Pecora G, Piattelli M, Orsini G, et al. Maxillary sinus augmentation 
with different biomaterials: a comparative histologic and histomorphometric study in man. Implant 
Dent 2006;15:197ࡁ207. 
[13] Tadjoedin ES, de Lange GL, Lyaruu DM, Kuiper L, Burger EH. High concentrations of bioactive 
glass material (BioGran) vs. autogenous bone for sinus floor elevation. Clin Oral Implan Res 
2002;13:428ࡁ36. 
[14] Yuan H, Fernandes H, Habibovic P, de Boer J, Barradas AM, de Ruiter A, et al. Osteoinductive 
ceramics as a synthetic alternative to autologous bone grafting. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107: 
13614ࡁ9. 
[15] Jensen T, Schou S, Svendsen PA, Forman JL, Gundersen HJ, Terheyden H, et al. Volumetric 
changes of the graft after maxillary sinus floor augmentation with Bio-Oss and autogenous bone in 
different ratios: a radiographic study in minipigs. Clin Oral Implan Res 2012;23:902ࡁ10. 
[16] Allegrini S, Jr., Yoshimoto M, Salles MB, Konig B, Jr. Bone regeneration in rabbit sinus lifting 
associated with bovine BMP. J Biomed Mater Res B 2004;68:127ࡁ31. 
[17] Oortgiesen DA, Walboomers XF, Bronckers AL, Meijer GJ, Jansen JA. Periodontal regeneration 
using an injectable bone cement combined with BMP-2 or FGF-2. J Tissue Eng Regen M Epub 
2012/05/02. doi: 10.1002/term.1514. 
[18] Groeneveld EHJ, Burger EH. Bone morphogenetic proteins in human bone regeneration. Eur J 
Endocrinol 2000;142:9ࡁ21.  
[19] Zheng LW, Wong MC, Rabie AB, Cheung LK. Evaluation of recombinant human bone 
morphogenetic protein-2 in mandibular distraction osteogenesis in rabbits: Effect of dosage and 
number of doses on formation of bone. Brit J Oral Max Surg 2006;44:487ࡁ94. 
[20] Wikesjo UM, Qahash M, Huang YH, Xiropaidis A, Polimeni G, Susin C. Bone morphogenetic 
proteins for periodontal and alveolar indications; biological observations - clinical implications. 
Orthod Craniofac Res 2009;12:263ࡁ70. 
[21] Polo CI, Oliveira Lima JL, De Lucca L, Piacezzi CB, Naclerio-Homem MD, Arana-Chavez VE, et 
al. Effect of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2 associated with a variety of bone 
substitutes on vertical guided bone regeneration in rabbit calvarium. J Periodontol 2012. Epub 
2012/04/25. doi: 10.1902/jop.2012.110674. 
[22] Fleming JE, Cornell CN, Muschler GF. Bone cells and matrices in orthopedic tissue engineering. 
Orthop Clin N Am 2000;31:357ࡁ74. 
[23] Seeherman H, Wozney J, Li R. Bone morphogenetic protein delivery systems. Spine. 2002;27(16 
Suppl 1):S16-23. 
[24] Bessa PC, Casal M, Reis RL. Bone morphogenetic proteins in tissue engineering: the road from 
laboratory to clinic, part II (BMP delivery). J Tissue Eng Regen M 2008;2:81ࡁ96. 
[25] Winn SR, Ulundag H, Hollinger JO. Sustained release emphasizing recombinant human bone 
morphogenetic protein-2. Adv Drug Deliver Rev 1998;31:303ࡁ18. 
[26] Carragee EJ, Hurwitz EL, Weiner BK. A critical review of recombinant human bone 
morphogenetic protein-2 trials in spinal surgery: emerging safety concerns and lessons learned. 
Spine J 2011;11:471ࡁ91. 
[27] McClellan JW, Mulconrey DS, Forbes RJ, Fullmer N. Vertebral bone resorption after 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
77
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion with bone morphogenetic protein (rhBMP-2). J Spinal 
Disord Tech 2006;19:483ࡁ6. 
[28] Williams BJ, Smith JS, Fu KM, Hamilton DK, Polly DW, Jr., Ames CP, et al. Does bone 
morphogenetic protein increase the incidence of perioperative complications in spinal fusion? A 
comparison of 55,862 cases of spinal fusion with and without bone morphogenetic protein. Spine. 
2011;36:1685ࡁ91. 
[29] Helgeson MD, Lehman RA, Jr., Patzkowski JC, Dmitriev AE, Rosner MK, Mack AW. Adjacent 
vertebral body osteolysis with bone morphogenetic protein use in transforaminal lumbar interbody 
fusion. Spine J 2011;11:507ࡁ10. 
[30] Luginbuehl V, Meinel L, Merkle HP, Gander B. Localized delivery of growth factors for bone 
repair. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2004;58:197ࡁ208. 
[31] Meikle MC, Mak WY, Papiaoannou S, Davies EH, Mordan N, Reynolds JJ. Bone-derived growth 
factor release from poly(alpha-hydroxy acid) implants in vitro. Biomaterials 1993;14:177ࡁ83. 
[32] De Groot K. Bioceramics of CaP. Boca Raton, CRC Press, 1983. 
[33] LeGeros RZ. Calcium phosphates in oral biology and medicine. Monographs in Oral Science Vol. 
15; Basel (Switzerland), Karger, 1991. 
[34] Bohner M. Calcium orthophosphates in medicine: from ceramics to calcium phosphate cements. 
Injury 2000;31:D37ࡁ47. 
[35] Dorozhkin SV. Medical application of calcium orthophosphate bioceramics. Bio 2011;1:1ࡁ51. 
[36] LeGeros R. Z. Properties of osteoconductive biomaterials: calcium phosphates. Clin Orthop Rel 
Res 2002;395:81ࡁ98. 
[37] LeGeros R. Z. Calcium phosphate-based osteoinductive materials. Chem Rev 2008;108:4742ࡁ53. 
[38] LeGeros R. Z. Biodegradation and bioresorption of calcium phosphate ceramics. Clin Mater 
1993;14:65ࡁ88. 
[39] Reddi A H. Morphogenesis and tissue engineering of bone and cartilage: inductive signals, stem 
cells and biomimetic materials. Tissue Eng 2000;6:351ࡁ9. 
[40] Ripamonti U, Ma S-S, Heever B, Reddi AH. Osteogenin, a bone morphogenic protein, absorbed on 
porous hydroxyapatite substrata, induces rapid bone differentiation in calvarial defects of adult 
primates. Plas Reconstr Surg 1992;90:382–93. 
[41] Alam MI, Asahina I, Ohmamiuda K, Enomoto S. Comparative study of biphasic calcium phosphate 
ceramics impregnated with rhBMP-2 as bone substitutes. J Biomed Mater Res 2001;54:129ࡁ38. 
[42] Yuan H, De Bruijn JD, Zhang X, Van Blitterswijk CA, De Groot K. Use of an osteoinductive 
biomaterial as a bone morphogenetic protein carrier. J Mater Sci Mater Med 2001;12:761–6. 
[43] Gonda Y, Shibata Y, Okuda T, Kawachi G, Kamitakahara M, Murayama H, et al. Stimulatory effect 
of hydrothermally synthesized biodegradable hydroxyapatite granules on osteogenesis and direct 
association with osteoclasts. Biomaterials 2009;30:4390ࡁ4400. 
[44] Tazaki J, Murata M, Akazawa T, Yamamoto M, Ito K, Arisue M, et al. BMP-2 release and dose- 
response studies in hydroxyapatite and beta-tricalcium phosphate. Biomed Mater Eng 2009;19: 
141ࡁ6. 
[45] Notodihardjo FZ, Kakudo N, Kushida S, Suzuki K, Kusumoto K. Bone regeneration with BMP-2 
and hydroxyapatite in critical-size calvarial defects in rats. J Cranio Maxillo Facial Surg 2012;40: 
287ࡁ91. 
78
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
[46] Kuboki Y, Takita H, Kobayashi D, Tsuruga E, Inoue M, Murata M, et al. BMP-induced 
osteogenesis on the surface of hydroxyapatite with geometrically feasible and nonfeasible structures: 
topology of osteogenesis. J Biomed Mater Res 1999;39:190ࡁ9. 
[47] Sohier J, Daculsi G, Sourice S, de Groot K, Layrolle P. Porous beta tricalcium phosphate scaffolds 
used as a BMP-2 delivery system for bone tissue engineering. J Biomed Mater Res A 2010;92: 
1105ࡁ14. 
[48] Lan Levengood SK, Polak SJ, Wheeler MB, Maki AJ, Clark SG, Jamison RD, Wagoner Johnson AJ. 
Multiscale osteointegration as a new paradigm for the design of calcium phosphate scaffolds for 
bone regeneration. Biomaterials 2010;31:3552ࡁ63. 
[49] Polak SJ, Lan Levengood SK, Wheeler MB, Maki AJ, Clark SG, Wagoner Johnson AJ (2011). 
Analysis of the roles of microporosity and BMP-2 on multiple measures of bone regeneration and 
healing in calcium phosphate scaffolds. Acta Biomater 2011;7:1760ࡁ71. 
[50] Yamasaki H, Sakai H. Osteogenic response to porous hydroxyapatite under the skin of dogs. 
Biomaterials 1992;13:308ࡁ12. 
[51] Ripamonti U. Osteoinduction in porous hydroxyapatite implanted in heterotopic sites of different 
animal models. Biomaterials 1996;17:31-5. 
[52] Yuan H, Kurashina K, de Bruijn JD, Li Y, de Groot K, Zhang X. A preliminary study on 
osteo-induction of two kinds of calcium phosphate ceramics. Biomaterials 1999;20:1799ࡁ1806. 
[53] Yuan H, Yang Z, de Bruijn JD, de Groot K, Zhang X. Material-dependent bone induction by 
calcium  phosphate ceramics: a 2.5-year study in dog. Biomaterials 2001;2:2617ࡁ23. 
[54] De Groot K. Carriers that concentrate native bone morphogenetic proteins in vivo. Tissue Eng 1998; 
4:337ࡁ41. 
[55] Jin Q-M, Takita H, Kohgo T, Atsumi K, Itoh H, Kuboki Y. Effects of geometry of hydroxyapatite as 
a cell substratum in BMP-induced ectopic bone formation. J Biomed Mater Res 2000;51:491ࡁ9. 
[56] Ripamonti U. Smart biomaterials with intrinsic osteoinductivity: geometric control of bone 
differentiation. In: Davies JE, editor, Bone engineering, em squared, Inc., Toronto, 2000; p. 215ࡁ22. 
[57] Yuan H, Fernandes H, Habibovic P, de Boer J, Barradas AMC, de Ruiter A, et al. Osteoinductive 
ceramics as a synthetic alternative to autologous bone grafting. P Nat Acad Sci (USA) 2010;107: 
13614ࡁ9. 
[58] Fu H, Rahaman MN, Day DE, Fu Q. Effect of process variables on the microstructure of hollow 
hydroxyapatite microspheres prepared by a glass conversion method. J Am Ceram Soc 2010;93: 
3116ࡁ23. 
[59] Fu H, Rahaman MN, Day DE, Brown RF. Hollow hydroxyapatite microspheres as a device for 
controlled delivery of proteins. J Mater Sci Mater Med 2011;22:579ࡁ91. 
[60] Fu H, Rahaman MN, Brown RF, Day DE. Evaluation of bone regeneration in implants composed of 
hollow HA microspheres loaded with transforming growth factor 1 in a rat calvarial defect model. 
Acta Biomater 2013;9:5718ࡁ27. 
[61] Xiao W, Fu H, Liu X, Bal BS, Rahaman MN. Hollow hydroxyapatite microspheres: a novel 
bioactive and osteoconductive carrier for controlled delivery of bone morphogenetic protein-2 in 
bone regeneration. Acta Biomater 2013;9:8374ࡁ83. 
[62] Boix T, Gomez-Morales J, Torrent-Burgues J, Monfort A, Puigdomenech P, Rodriguez-Clemente R. 
Adsorption of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein rhBMP-2 onto hydroxyapatite. J 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
79
Osteoconductive and Osteoinductive Implants Composed of Hollow Hydroxyapatite
Inorg Biochem 2005;99:1043ࡁ50. 
[63] Ruhe PQ, Boerman OC, Russel FG, Mikos AG, Spauwen PH, Jansen JA. In vivo release of 
rhBMP-2 loaded porous calcium phosphate cement pretreated with albumin. J Mater Sci Mater 
Med 2006;17: 919ࡁ27. 
[64] Autefage H, Briand-Mesange F, Cazalbou S, Drouet C, Fourmy D, Goncalves S, et al. Adsorption 
and release of BMP-2 on nanocrystalline apatite-coated and uncoated hydroxyapatite/ 
beta-tricalcium phosphate porous ceramics. J Biomed Mater Res B 2009;91:706ࡁ15. 
[65] Doi Y, Iwanaga H, Shibutani T, Moriwaki Y, Iwayama Y. Osteoclastic responses to various calcium 
phosphates in cell cultures. J Biomed Mater Res 1999;47:424ࡁ33. 
[66] Leeuwenburgh S, Layrolle P, Barrère F, de Bruijn J, Schoonman J, van Blitterswijk CA, et al. 
Osteoclastic resorption of biomimetic calcium phosphate coatings in vitro. J Biomed Mater Res 
2001;56:208ࡁ15. 
[67] Rohanizadeh R, Chung K. Hydroxyapatite as a carrier for bone morphogenetic protein. J Oral 
Implantol 2011;37:659ࡁ72. 
[68] Perri B, Cooper M, Lauryssen C, Anand N. Adverse swelling associated with use of rh-BMP-2 in 
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion: a case study. Spine J 2007;7:235ࡁ9. 
[69] Boden SD. Bioactive factors for bone tissue engineering. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1999;367:S84ࡁ94. 
[70] Zara JN, Siu RK, Zhang X, Shen J, Ngo R, Lee M, et al. High doses of bone morphogenetic protein 
2 induce structurally abnormal bone and inflammation in vivo. Tissue Eng A 2011;17:1389ࡁ99. 
[71] Graziano A, d'Aquino R, Cusella-De Angelis MG, Laino G, Piattelli A, Pacifici M, et al. Concave 
pit-containing scaffold surfaces improve stem cell-derived osteoblast performance and lead to 
significant bone tissue formation. PLOS One 2007;2(6):e496. 
[72] Jin GZ, Kim JH, Park JH, Choi SJ, Kim HW, Wall I. Performance of evacuated calcium phosphate 
microcarriers loaded with mesenchymal stem cells within a rat calvarium defect. J Mater Sci Mater 
Med 2012;23:1739ࡁ48. 
[73] Ripamonti U, Richter PW, Nilen RW, Renton L. The induction of bone formation by smart biphasic 
hydroxyapatite tricalcium phosphate biomimetic matrices in the non-human primate Papio ursinus. 
J Cell Mol Med 2008;12:2609ࡁ21. 
81
DEPOSITION OF AMORPHOUS CaP ON PURE TITANIUM IN DMEM AT 37 C  
 
A. Cuneyt Tas 
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA 
 
ABSTRACT 
DMEM (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium) solutions are used in performing in vitro cell 
culture experiments to assess the cell biocompatibility of synthetic biomaterials. In this study, Hepes-
buffered, phenol red- and sodium pyruvate-free DMEM solutions were used, for the first time as 
immersion media at 37 C, to test alkali-treated (5 M NaOH, 60°C, 24 h) grade-1 titanium substrates. 
Such DMEM solutions were found to deposit X-ray-amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP), in one or two 
weeks, on the soaked grade-1 Ti substrates. An inorganic solution (free of amino acids, vitamins, 
glucose, sodium pyruvate and phenol red), simulating the ion concentrations of DMEM solutions, was 
also used for the first time in depositing ACP on grade-1 Ti substrates upon soaking at 37 C for only 24 
h. Samples were analyzed by using SEM, TEM, XRD, FTIR, ICP-AES, AAS, and XPS.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Alpha-minimum essential medium ( -MEM) and Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) 
are solutions (media) which contain amino acids, vitamins, glucose and especially the inorganic salts at 
concentrations similar to those present in the whole mammalian serum. Both 
–MEM and DMEM 
solutions, the preferred media to perform in vitro cell culture studies, originated from the pioneering 
work of Eagle 1, 2 , which were focused on developing synthetic media with components essential and 
sufficient for the survival and growth of a wide variety of animal cells. Eagle’s original minimum 
essential medium (MEM) contained 13 amino acids, 8 vitamins, glucose and inorganic salts such as 
NaCl, KCl, CaCl2, MgCl2 6H2O, NaH2PO4 2H2O and NaHCO3 2 . Eagle’s MEM solution had a Ca/P 
molar ratio of 1.64 and a HCO3
- concentration of 23.8 mM. Dulbecco’s modification to the Eagle 
medium consisted of adding 2% horse serum to it 3, 4  resulting in an increase in the number of amino 
acids to 15. In a cell culture study directly comparing the -MEM and DMEM solutions by using the 
human osteoblastic bone marrow cells, Coelho et al. 5  reported that the cell proliferation was similar in 
cultures grown in the two media but ALP (alkaline phosphatase) activity and ability to form mineralized 
deposits were lower in DMEM cultures. 
DMEM can be obtained either as a powder or as a solution and there happens to be a number of 
variants of DMEM available 6 , mainly in the forms containing high, low or no glucose at all, with or 
without glutamine, with or without Na-pyruvate, with or without phenol red, and with or without Hepes 
(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid). Therefore, it is important to specify the catalog 
number of the manufacturer of the DMEM preferred in any study. The specific DMEM solution chosen 
for this study was previously used in testing the biomineralization of brushite powders at the human 
body temperature 7 . Most of the DMEM solutions produced today, in contrast to the original Eagle’s 
MEM, have a Ca/P molar ratio of 1.99 and a HCO3
- concentration of 44.05 mM. Blood plasma’s Ca/P 
molar ratio and HCO3
- concentration are 2.50 and 27 mM, respectively. Three different SBF 
(synthetic/simulated body fluid) solution formulations, which do not contain amino acids, vitamins and 
glucose, can match the Ca/P molar ratio (2.50) and the HCO3
- concentration (27 mM) of human blood 
plasma 8-12 , but cells cannot survive and grow in SBF solutions 13, 14 . 
The direct comparison between DMEM and HCO3-deficient (i.e., 4.2 mM), Cl-rich (148 mM) 
SBF 15  solutions have been the subject of a limited number of previous studies, in which bioglass 16, 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
82
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
17  or calcium phosphate 18  samples have been soaked in both solutions, side-by-side, at 37 C, 
followed by the microscopic examination of the spherulites (or globules) forming on the sample 
surfaces. These studies 16-18 , by only reporting EDXS (energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy) data, 
proved that the DMEM solution used was able to cover the bioglass, glass-ceramic, hydroxyapatite 
(Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2), 
- and 
- polymorphs of tricalcium phosphate (Ca3(PO4)2) surfaces with the 
spherulites of a calcium phosphate (CaP) phase just like the SBF solutions would do. Nevertheless, none 
of these reports 16-18  provided any x-ray diffraction (XRD) data to ascertain whether the CaP formed 
on sample surfaces upon immersion in DMEM was amorphous, cryptocrystalline or crystalline, as well 
as whether that CaP phase contained any octacalcium phosphate (Ca8(HPO4)2(PO4)4 5H2O) and/or 
brushite (CaHPO4 2H2O) or not. Declercq et al. 19 , on the other hand, had given quite a practical 
example on how to use experimental XRD and FTIR data to monitor the extent of biomineralization (or 
calcification) on rat osteoblast cells kept at 37°C in a cell culture medium. 
Immersion tests performed at 37 C by using Hepes-free DMEM solutions containing phenol red, 
instead of SBF, were studied only on Ti6Al4V alloy substrates but not on pure Ti samples. Faure et al. 
20  soaked the NaOH-treated (10 M NaOH solution, 60 C for 24 h) Ti6Al4V substrates in a DMEM 
solution (free of Hepes buffer, but containing phenol red and Na-pyruvate) at 37 C, and reported by 
XRD data that well-crystallized apatitic calcium phosphate (Ap-CaP) forming on the substrates. 
However, the low magnification electron microscope (SEM) photomicrographs provided by Faure et al. 
20  made the detection and differentiation of the morphology of the formed Ap-CaP particles from the 
texture of the underlying NaOH-treatment layer somewhat difficult. Benhayoune et al. 21, 22  soaked 
Ti6Al4V samples having an electrodeposited CaP layer on them into a DMEM solution (again, Hepes-
free yet containing Na-pyruvate and phenol red) at 37 C and observed the formation of new Ap-CaP 
nuclei on the sample surfaces. 
The novelty of this study is the formation of X-ray-amorphous CaP (ACP) at 37°C, instead of 
hydroxyapatite, by the Hepes-buffered, phenol red- and sodium pyruvate-free DMEM solution, and by 
its purely inorganic variant solution, on the immersed alkali-treated grade-1 titanium coupons. Most 
supersaturated calcification solutions, including all SBFs, can form hydroxyapatite on substrates 
(including alkali-treated titanium 23 ) immersed in them at 37°C, but none of such solutions were yet 
reported to form only ACP. DMEM solutions are used more widely than the SBF solutions in testing the 
biological compatibility of synthetic biomaterials (regardless of their polymeric, ceramic or metallic 
nature) in the presence of cells. The hereby reported ability of such solutions in depositing amorphous 
CaP, at 37°C, on the soaked biomaterials may also affect the results of research using Hepes-buffered, 
phenol red- and Na-pyruvate-free DMEM solutions as the cell culture medium. 
 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Grade-1 titanium (Ti) is obtained in the form of a 51 x 51 x 0.5 mm sheets (ESPI Metals, Lot 
number Q14641, Ashland, OR) and then cut into 10 x 10 x 0.5 mm square coupons by using a 
guillotine-cutter, followed by cleaning in pure acetone and water. The titanium coupons were certified 
by the supplier to contain no more than 0.18 wt% O, 0.20% Fe, 0.08% C, 0.03% N and 0.015% H. As-
received grade-1 Ti coupons had the mean Vickers hardness of 140 HV ±17, which did not change with 
soaking in solutions at 37°C.  
The Hepes-buffered DMEM solution (of pH 7.4) used in this study did not contain phenol red 
and sodium pyruvate (Gibco, 1X, sterile, Catalog number 21063-029, Life Technologies, Grand Island, 
NY). The composition of the DMEM solution is given elsewhere 7 . Alkaline treatments of Ti coupons 
were performed in a Teflon  beaker placed in a Teflon-lined stainless steel pressure vessel (Model 4760, 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
83
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
Parr Instrument Company, Moline, IL). One hundred mL of 5 M NaOH (pellets, Catalog number 28245, 
Merck) solutions were prepared in the Teflon beaker by using pre-boiled deionized water, followed by 
placing one Ti coupon into the alkali solution 23 . The isothermal heating of the sealed pressure vessel 
containing the Ti coupon was performed at 60 C for 24 h in a microprocessor-controlled oven. Samples 
were then washed with deionized water and dried at RT for 36 h. The soaking of NaOH-treated Ti 
coupons at 37 C in DMEM solutions was performed in heat-sterilized (at 140 C for 12 h) and sealed 
glass media bottles at 37 0.1 C. Ti coupons were soaked horizontally in 100 mL portions of DMEM 
solutions. At the end of the prescribed soaking times of one to two weeks, Ti coupons were removed, 
washed with deionized water and dried at RT. DMEM solutions did not show a change in their pH 
values at the end of 1 and 2 week runs. 
For the purposes of providing a direct morphological comparison between the CaP deposits 
obtained from SBF and DMEM solutions, a Tris-buffered, 27 mM HCO3-containing SBF solution was 
also used during the immersion tests of grade-1 Ti coupons. This unique SBF solution had a Ca/P molar 
ratio of 2.50 and had a HCO3
- concentration (=27 mM) identical with that of blood plasma 8, 9 . The 
SBF soaking of alkali-treated grade-1 Ti samples was continued for 4 days at 37 C. 
The following chemicals were used in preparing an inorganic salt solution (free of amino acids, 
vitamins, glucose and Hepes) which mimic the inorganic salts compartment of the DMEM solution; 
NaCl (>99.5%, Cat. No: 106404, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), KCl (>99.9%, Cat. No: 104933, 
Merck), NaHCO3 (>99.9%, Cat. No: 106329, Merck), NaH2PO4 H2O (>99.5%, Cat. No: 106346, 
Merck), CaCl2 2H2O (ࡍ99.9%, Cat. No: 102382, Merck), and MgCl2 6H2O ( 99.5%, Cat. No: 459330, 
Carlo Erba Reagenti, Milano, Italy). This solution with a pH value between 7.38 and 7.43 from RT to 
37 C (Table 1) was previously formulated by our group 24  as a simple aqueous medium in testing the 
hydrothermal transformations of calcium phosphate bioceramic powders. The Ca/P molar ratio of this 
inorganic solution was adjusted to 2.50 in deviation from that of the DMEM formulation 24 . The salts 
indicated in Table 1 are added one-by-one to 1 L of deionized water in the order they were given. 
Alkali-treated grade-1 Ti coupons were kept in 100 mL of this solution at 37 C for 24 h, followed by 
washing with deionized water and drying at RT. The pH value of the solution did not change in 24 h. 
 
Table 1     Composition of the inorganic salt solution similar to DMEM  (DMEM-i) 
 
Chemical 
 
Amount 
Ion concentration 
Ion in DMEM 
  (g/L)  
 
(mM)  
(mM)  
 
(mM) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
NaCl  
 
4.7865  
Na+: 126.856  
126.856 
KCl 
 
 
0.3974  
K+: 5.33 
 
5.33 
MgCl2 6H2O  
0.1655  
Mg2+: 0.814 
 
0.814 
CaCl2 2H2O 
 
0.3323  
Ca2+: 2.26 
 
1.8 
NaH2PO4 H2O  
0.1250  
H2PO4
-: 0.906  
0.906 
NaHCO3 
 
3.7005  
HCO3
-: 44.05  
44.05 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
Surface deposits of soaked samples were studied by using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, 
EVO50, Carl Zeiss AG, Dresden, Germany). To produce powder samples of CaP deposited on Ti 
soaked in DMEM solutions larger coupons (25 x 25 x 0.5 mm) were soaked in the solutions, and the 
material scraped out using a clean razor was named as the powder samples. Quantitative chemical 
84
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
analyses (i.e., Ca/P molar ratio) of powder samples were performed by using inductively-coupled 
plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Model 61E, Thermo Electron, Madison, WI). Atomic 
absorption spectroscopy (AAS, Model PinAAcle 900H, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) was used for the 
quantitative determination of calcium and phosphorus concentrations in the immersion solutions of Ti 
samples, as a function of aging time at 37°C. Solution samples were collected for AAS analyses at every 
24 h, from the first to the end of the 13th day at 37°C (i.e., total of 13 bottles for 13 days, each containing 
an alkali-treated grade-1 Ti sample in it), and the solutions were filtered through a 0.22 ͮm filter 
membrane prior to measurements. X-ray photoelectron spectrometer-based (XPS, Model 5400, 
PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) depth profile analysis was performed by slowly removing the CaP coating 
on Ti samples using an argon (Ar) ion etch gun, which was calibrated at the removal rate of 3 nm/min. 
On the other hand, the scraped CaP deposits from the surfaces of the Ti coupons were also 
analyzed by using a powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Advance D8, Bruker AG, Karlsruhe, 
Germany). These powders were also analyzed by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, 
Spectrum One, Perkin Elmer, MA, USA) after mixing them with KBr powder, followed by pressing into 
a 1 cm diameter transparent pellet. FTIR analyses were performed at 0.5 cm-1 resolution with 128 scans. 
A diamond ATR (attenuated total reflection) accessory was used to directly collect FTIR data of CaP 
deposits formed on Ti samples. For the transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL 2010, Tokyo, 
Japan) investigations of the SBF precipitates, small aliquots of respective powder samples were first 
dispersed in pure ethanol, and then few drops of those suspensions were dried on Cu sample holder grids 
prior to imaging at 200 kV. The surface area of the SBF precipitate samples was determined by applying 
the standard Brunnauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) method to the nitrogen adsorption isotherm obtained at -
196°C using a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 instrument. 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Alkali treatment (5 M NaOH solution, 60 C, 24 h) of grade-1 Ti coupons rendered the surface 
covered with a porous network of fibers of Na2Ti2O4(OH)2 (ICDD-PDF 57-0123) less than 100 nm 
thick, as shown in the SEM photomicrographs of Figures 1a and 1b. We have previously reported the 
grazing incidence-XRD data of 5 M NaOH (or 5 M KOH)-treated Ti 25 . 
 
 
 
Figure 1    Typical SEM photomicrographs of the surface of grade-1 Ti soaked in 5 M NaOH solution at 
60 C for 24 h (at two different magnifications) 
 
 
The specific DMEM solution (of light yellow color) used in this study deposited a CaP phase of 
a unique morphology on grade-1 Ti coupons both in 1 week and 2 weeks of immersion runs. While the 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
85
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
Ti coupon-containing solutions aged at 37 C for 1 week did not display any turbidity, the solutions aged 
for 2 weeks started to display slight turbidity after about the 10th day. The SEM photomicrographs of 
Figures 2a through 2f depicted the covering of the NaOH-treated grade-1 Ti surfaces, upon 1 and 2 
weeks of soaking in DMEM solutions, with a phase having a drastically different morphology than those 
of the typical SBF-produced globular deposits (shown in Figures 2g and 2h to provide a direct 
comparison).  
 
 
 
Figure 2    SEM photomicrographs of alkali-treated grade-1 Ti soaked in DMEM solution for 7 d at 
37 C (A) to (C); for 14 d at 37 C (D) to (F); alkali-treated grade-1 Ti soaked in a Tris-buffered, 27 mM 
HCO3
- containing SBF solution for 4 d at 37 C (G) to (H). 
86
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
By the end of 1 week of DMEM-soaking (Figs. 2a, 2b and 2c), large sheets of relatively smooth-
surfaced CaP (confirmed by numerous EDXS spot analyses) deposits seemed to connect the underlying 
hydroxylated sodium titanate nanofibers with one another. SBF solutions do not form such planar sheets 
of CaP material on Ti. However, at the end of 2 weeks of continuous soaking (Figs. 2d, 2e and 2f) in 
DMEM almost none of those starting hydroxylated sodium titanate nanofibers were visible, and the 
surface coverage with the nanoporous CaP phase was complete. It seemed like the sheets of CaP were 
forming first (within 1 week or so) and then these were acting as planar CaP scaffolds on which 
dissolution-reprecipitation processes were taking place at the nanoscale during the 2nd week. Such a 
mechanism was again not encountered in the SBF solution-based Ti coating practices. 
ICP-AES analyses confirmed that the coated substance is Mg-doped calcium phosphate. ICP-
AES analyses (5 analyses on 5 repetition samples) indicated the presence of 1568 45 ppm Mg in the 
coated substance having a Ca/P molar ratio of 1.40 0.11. ATR-FTIR data of DMEM-coated Ti coupons 
are shown in Fig. 3, together with those of as received grade-1 Ti and alkali-treated grade-1 Ti. 
 
 
Figure 3 ATR-FTIR data of grade-1 Ti (1), alkali-treated Ti (2), and DMEM-ACP-coated Ti samples (3)   
 
The inorganic salt solution (with a Ca/P molar ratio of 2.5) of Table 1 was much faster, in 
comparison to the DMEM solutions, in depositing X-ray amorphous CaP globules with extremely 
smooth surfaces on the alkali-treated grade-1 Ti samples at 37 C (Figs. 4a and 4b). 
 
 
 
Figure 4    SEM photomicrographs (at two different magnifications) of ACP deposits forming in 24 h on 
the alkali-treated grade-1 Ti coupons soaked at 37 C in the solution of Table 1 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
87
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
The ICP-AES analyses (5 analyses on 5 repetition samples) of the scraped powdery deposits 
gave the Ca/P molar ratio as 1.45 0.19. The powders scraped off from the surfaces of Ti coupons 
soaked in the inorganic salt solution contained 1544 53 ppm magnesium, according to the ICP-AES 
analyses. The powder XRD and FTIR data of the scraped ACP deposits were given in Figs. 5a and 5b. 
Both of Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b data correspond to ACP. To facilitate direct comparison with Hepes-buffered 
DMEM and SBF solutions, a characteristic XRD data of cryptocrystalline CaP deposited on Ti, by using 
a 27 mM HCO3-containing Tris/HCl-buffered SBF solution 9 , is given in Fig. 5c, in which broad 
peaks of apatitic CaP (labeled as Ap) are visible. 
 
  (a)  
 (b) 
 (c) 
 
Figure 5   (a) XRD data of ACP deposits scraped from the surface of coupons shown in Fig. 4; (b) FTIR 
data of the same ACP deposits; (c) XRD data of Ti coated in Tris-SBF of 27 mM HCO3
- for 4 d at 37°C 
 
The XRD and FTIR data (Figs. 5a and 5b) obtained from the scraped deposits were decisive in 
confirming the amorphous nature of the CaP deposits. CaP deposited from a physiological solution with 
such an extraordinary smooth surface (Fig. 4b) was not reported prior to this study. 
The XPS depth profile analysis of grade-1 Ti immersed in an Hepes-buffered DMEM solution at 
37°C for two weeks is shown in Fig. 6a. The SEM photomicrographs of this sample is shown in Figs. 2d 
through 2f. The XPS depth profiling showed that the Mg-doped CaP coating had a thickness of about 
220 nm (Fig. 6a). Fig. 6b shows the AAS data of solutions kept at 37°C from 1 through 13 days. 
Calcium and phosphorus concentrations of the solutions showed a slight yet noticeable decrease with 
aging time. Phosphorus concentrations, as a function of aging time, of DMEM and the inorganic 
solution (Table 1) were found to be identical with one another.  
 
88
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
 (a) 
 (b) 
Figure 6    (a) XPS depth profile of DMEM-soaked Ti sample for 14 d at 37°C; (b) AAS data of the 
DMEM solution and the inorganic solution (Table 1) as a function of aging time at 37°C 
 
Synthetic biomaterials, whether they are metallic, ceramic or polymeric, shall be thoroughly 
tested for their in vivo biocompatibility. In vivo animal tests apparently place a burden on the shoulders 
of many materials-based research groups since such animal tests require tedious histological 
examinations and careful interpretation. In vitro osteoblast cell culture tests, mainly reporting the 
live/dead cell numbers and the popular ALP (alkaline phosphatase) activity data, have thus been the 
most routine tests performed by the materials-based research groups which lack collaborative 
partnerships with the external veterinarians and skilled histologists. DMEM (or -MEM) solutions are 
the media of choice in such in vitro cell culture tests. 
One may underline several issues here;  
(1) the SBF solutions commonly deposit micron-sized spherulites/globules of cryptocrystalline 
apatitic CaP at 37 C even if the samples to be soaked in it were selected from a set as diverse as 
bioglass, glass-ceramic, titanium, or polymers,  
(2) since the SBF solution is a supersaturated (with respect to apatitic CaP formation) and 
metastable calcification solution, its CaP deposition rate on the sample surfaces will be accelerated if the 
soaked material is soluble in that solution (i.e., leaching out of calcium and/or phosphate ions from the 
substrate) or has a slightly basic surface to trigger the nucleation of the apatitic and Ca-deficient CaP in 
the form of spherulites/globules,  
(3) as a practical example, if one keeps a liter of freshly prepared SBF solution (with no substrate 
whatsoever to test in it) in a tightly sealed sterile bottle in a refrigerator at 4 C for 4 months, it will 
autogenously precipitate high surface area (approx. 900 m2/g) carbonated, cryptocrystalline apatitic CaP 
(Figs. 7a through 7d); if a similar bottle of SBF, with no sample in it, is heated at 37 C for 1 week the 
rate of precipitate formation (with the observation of excessive solution turbidity) is drastically 
increased,  
(4) in case of planning an in vitro cell culture study for a given synthetic biomaterial, one can 
easily incorporate into that study, as a control sample, the “biomaterial + DMEM (or -MEM) + no 
cells” compartment. Moreover, at the end of a cell culture study it may always be a good practice to 
examine the extent of any biomineralization (by using SEM, XRD and FTIR) taking place on the 
samples in the presence of the cells (or in the absence of cells) in the culture medium, as exemplified by 
Declercq et al. 19 . 
FTIR data can be used as a rapid and powerful tool in differentiating between ACP and 
cryptocrystalline Ap-CaP. ACP samples (Fig. 5b) do not exhibit that peak splitting observed in that 
broad 600 to 500 cm-1 phosphate band (Fig. 8a) in the case of cryptocrystalline Ap-CaP samples. The 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
89
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
XRD data also help to differentiate between X-ray-amorphous CaP (Fig. 5a) and poorly crystalline Ap-
CaP (Fig. 8c) samples. 
 
 (a) 
  (b) 
 (c)            
   (d) 
 
Figure 7    FTIR (a), BET surface area (b), XRD (c) and TEM (d) of in situ forming cryptocrystalline 
apatitic calcium phosphate (Ap-CaP) precipitates recovered from an SBF solution kept undisturbed, in a 
sealed glass bottle, in a refrigerator at 4 C for 120 days 
 
Since both solutions of DMEM and Table 1 (inorganic) resulted in the formation of X-ray-
amorphous CaP (i.e., ACP) on the surface of grade-1 Ti, one may argue that the formation of ACP in the 
DMEM solutions cannot be ascribed solely to the presence of amino acids, vitamins, glucose and Hepes 
buffer present in them. The presence of Na-pyruvate (C3H3NaO3, pyruvic acid sodium salt) and phenol 
red, and the absence of Hepes in the DMEM solutions of the previous studies 20-22  in coating 
Ti6Al4V substrates with cryptocrystalline Ap-CaP (but not with ACP) actually presents deviations from 
the experimental conditions of the current study in four points; (1) Na-pyruvate, (2) phenol red, (3) 
Hepes, and (4) use of grade-1 Ti versus Ti6Al4V. Na-pyruvate is added to cell culture solutions as an 
additional source of energy (besides glucose) for the cells. Since neither the previous studies 20-22  nor 
the present one had cells in the solutions, the inclusion of a chemical to provide additional energy to the 
cells is omitted in this study. If the DMEM solution selected is of the low glucose (e.g., 1000 mg/L) 
specification, then the manufacturers add Na-pyruvate at a concentration of about 110 mg/L (=1 mM) 
6 .  
Mg concentration in DMEM solutions is fixed at 0.814 mM. If the pyruvate molecules (CH3O3) 
in the solution do have a higher affinity to Mg2+ than they have to Na+ (Mg-pyruvate: C6H6MgO6), then 
there are more pyruvate groups in such DMEM solutions than there is Mg2+ (1 versus 0.814 mM). If a 
90
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
significant portion of the Mg2+ ions in DMEM 20-22  are bound to pyruvates, then there may be not 
enough Mg2+ left necessary for the stabilization of ACP. Stabilization of ACP by Mg was described by 
Boskey and Posner 26 . Both DMEM solution and the inorganic solution of Table 1 contains the ACP-
stabilizer Mg2+ ions. Phenol red (C19H14O5S, phenolsulfonphthalein) is added at a concentration of 15 
mg/L to the DMEM solutions to serve as a pH indicator, if and when the pH of a DMEM solution drops 
below 6.8 (typically observed when the solution is contaminated with bacteria), the solution will lose its 
red color and turn yellow 6 . Likewise, if and when the pH of a DMEM solution rises beyond 8.2, the 
solution’s color will change to bright pink. The pH values of the DMEM solutions used here (phenol 
red-free) did not change after 1 or 2 weeks experiments at 37 C. Since there would be no cells in the 
DMEM solutions, it has been decided at the start to avoid both phenol red and Na-pyruvate.  
The previous researchers working with titanium alloys 20-22 , however, did select DMEM 
solutions which are not Hepes-buffered. Hepes is an essential component which shall help keeping most 
of the HCO3
- ions (44.05 mM initially) of DMEM in solution especially during the long soaking times of 
1 or 2 weeks at 37 C. Cell culture studies are performed in basically open (although loosely covered, 
i.e., not gas-tight) plastic well plates in 5% CO2-supplemented incubators, therefore even a Hepes-free 
DMEM solution can get some HCO3
- from the CO2 gas constantly present in such incubators. Since the 
experiments of previous researchers 20-22  and those of this study were not performed in such CO2 
incubators, but in sealed or capped bottles, the only HCO3
- source available was the bicarbonate ion 
initially present in the DMEM solution. We considered minimizing the loss of HCO3
- (aq) at the liquid-
gas interface in the glass media bottles over long soaking times with the help of Hepes present in the 
starting solution. However, the presence or the absence of Hepes in DMEM may well not be the only 
reason for the preferential deposition of either Ap-CaP or ACP on Ti. On the other hand, the issue of 
using Ti6Al4V versus grade-1 Ti in DMEM, to come up with a plausible explanation for the formation 
of Ap-CaP or ACP, still needs to be tackled experimentally. The alkali treatment of Ti6Al4V versus the 
alkali treatment of grade-1 Ti may produce chemically different surfaces, which would then react 
differently upon soaking in DMEM. 
Synthetic ACP, according to Posner and Boskey [26], consisted of roughly spherical 3Ca3(PO4)2 
clusters (Ca/P=1.50), which formed in water and were then aggregated randomly to produce the larger 
globular particles of ACP with the inter-cluster space being filled with water. Mg2+ ions act as an ACP 
stabilizer, as mentioned above 26 . HCO3
- ions, which are present at a high concentration of 44.05 mM 
(in comparison to the blood plasma value of 27 mM) in DMEM solutions, are also known to stabilize 
ACP 27 . Therefore, two of the most significant ACP stabilizers, namely, Mg2+ and HCO3
-, were 
present in both the DMEM and the inorganic solution (of Table 1) used in this study. It would thus be 
unusual to form hydroxyapatite, instead of ACP, in both solutions.  
The human venous plasma and whole blood contain amino acids and the successful identification 
and quantification of those amino have been previously reported [28, 29]. Conconi et al. 30  reported 
that the amino acids (lysine, threonine, methionine, tryptophan, arginine, which are all present in the 
DMEM solutions) increased both the osteoblast proliferation and alkaline phosphatase activity of rat 
osteoblasts cultured in vitro. Imamura et al. 31  and Tentorio and Canova 32  separately showed that 
the amino acid lysine adsorbs itself on pure metallic Ti and on amorphous Ti hydrous oxide surfaces, 
respectively, at neutral pH values. While the inorganic SBF solutions cannot provide any practical 
means of producing synthetic biomaterials with some amino acids adsorbed on their surfaces, DMEM 
solutions can provide unique biomaterial surfaces already containing adsorbed amino acids.  
 
 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
91
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
CONCLUSIONS 
Hepes-buffered, phenol red- and sodium pyruvate-free DMEM solutions were found to deposit 
X-ray-amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) on alkali-treated grade-1 titanium coupons soaked for one 
and two weeks at 37 C. Previous studies performed with other DMEM solutions and with Ti6Al4V 
substrates reported the deposition of cryptocrystalline apatitic calcium phosphate, these reports 
contrasted with the findings of this study. An inorganic and amino acid-, vitamins-, glucose-free solution 
mimicking the inorganic ion concentrations of the DMEM solutions was also found to deposit ACP, but 
not hydroxyapatite, at 37 C on alkali-treated grade-1 Ti coupons soaked for only 24 h. A 
cryptocrystalline apatitic calcium phosphate with an extraordinary surface area of 900 m2/g is reported 
to form in a Tris-buffered SBF solution of 27 mM HCO3
- upon refrigerating at +4°C for prolonged 
times. 
 
REFERENCES 
1 H. Eagle, Nutrition Needs of Mammalian Cells in Tissue Culture, Science, 122, 501-04 (1955). 
2 H. Eagle, Amino Acid Metabolism in Mammalian Cell Cultures, Science, 130, 432-7 (1959). 
3 R. Dulbecco and G. Freeman, Plaque Production by the Polyoma Virus, Virology, 8, 396-7 (1959). 
4 L. Sachs, M. Fogel, and E. Winocour, In Vitro Analysis of a Mammalian Tumour Virus, Nature, 183, 
663-4 (1959). 
5 M. J. Coelho, A. T. Cabral, and M. H. Fernandes, Human Bone Cell Cultures in Biocompatibility 
testing. Part I: Osteoblastic Differentiation of Serially Passaged Human Bone Marrow Cells Cultured in 
-MEM and in DMEM, Biomaterials, 21, 1087-94 (2000). 
6 http://www.invitrogen.com 
7 
S. 
Mandel 
and 
A. 
C. 
Tas, 
Brushite 
(CaHPO4 2H2O) 
to 
Octacalcium 
Phosphate 
(Ca8(HPO4)2(PO4)4 5H2O) transformation in DMEM Solutions at 36.5 C, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 30, 245-54 
(2010). 
8 D. Bayraktar and A. C. Tas, Chemical Preparation of Carbonated Calcium Hydroxyapatite Powders at 
37 C in Urea-containing Synthetic Body Fluids, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 19, 2573-9 (1999).  
9 A. C. Tas, Synthesis of Biomimetic Ca-Hydroxyapatite Powders at 37C in Synthetic Body Fluids, 
Biomaterials, 21, 1429-38 (2000). 
10 H. M. Kim, T. Miyazaki, T. Kokubo, and T. Nakamura, Revised Simulated Body Fluid, Key Eng. 
Mater., 192-195, 47-50 (2001). 
11 A. Pasinli, M. Yuksel, E. Celik, S. Sener, and A. C. Tas, A New Approach in Biomimetic Synthesis of 
Calcium Phosphate Coatings using Lactic acid-Na Lactate buffered Body Fluid Solution, Acta 
Biomater., 6, 2282-8 (2010). 
12 M. A. Miller, M. R. Kendall, M. K. Jain, P. R. Larson, A. S. Madden, and A. C. Tas, Testing of 
Brushite (CaHPO4 2H2O) in Synthetic Biomineralization Solutions and in situ Crystallization of 
Brushite Micro-granules, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 95, 2178-88 (2012).  
13 R. R. Rao, A. Jiao, D. H. Kohn, and J. P. Stegemann, Exogenous Mineralization of Cell-seeded and 
Unseeded Collagen-Chitosan Hydrogels using Modified Culture Medium, Acta Biomater., 8, 1560-5 
(2012). 
14 R. R. Rao, A. Jiao, D. H. Kohn, and J. P. Stegemann, Corrigendum to: “Exogenous Mineralization of 
Cell-seeded and Unseeded Collagen-Chitosan Hydrogels using Modified Culture Medium” Acta 
Biomater., 8, 1560-65 (2012) , Acta Biomater., 8, 2417 (2012). 
15 T. Kokubo, H. Kushitani, S. Sakka, T. Kitsugi, and T. Yamamuro, Solutions Able to Reproduce in 
vivo Surface-Structure Changes in Bioactive Glass-Ceramic A-W, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 24, 721-34 
(1990). 
92
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Deposition of Amorphous CaP on Pure Titanium in DMEM at 37°C
16 G. Lutisanova, M. T. Palou, and J. Kozankova, Comparison of Bioactivity in vitro of Glass and Glass 
Ceramic Materials during Soaking in SBF and DMEM Medium, Ceramics-Silikaty, 55, 199-207 (2011). 
17 G. Lutisanova, M. T. Palou, and J. Kozankova, Mechanism of Bioactivity of LS2-FA Glass-Ceramics 
in SBF and DMEM Medium, Ceramics-Silikaty, 56, 229-37 (2012). 
18 J. T. Y. Lee, Y. Leng, K. L. Chow, F. Ren, X. Ge, K. Wang, and X. Lu, Cell Culture Medium as an 
Alternative to Conventional Simulated Body Fluid, Acta Biomater., 7, 2615-22 (2011). 
19 H. A. Declercq, R. M. H. Verbeeck, L.I.F.J.M. DeRidder, E. H. Schacht, and M. J. Cornelissen, 
Calcification as an Indicator of Osteoinductive Capacity of Biomaterials in Osteoblastic Cell Cultures, 
Biomaterials, 26, 4964-74 (2005). 
20 J. Faure, A. Balamurugan, H. Benhayoune, P. Torres, G. Balossier, and J. M. F. Ferreira, 
Morphological and Chemical Characterization of Biomimetic Bone like Apatite Formation on Alkali 
treated Ti6Al4V Titanium Alloy, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 29, 1252-7 (2009). 
21 N. Dumelie, H. Benhayoune, D. Richard, D. Laurent-Maquin, and G. Balossier, In vitro Precipitation 
of Electrodeposited Calcium-deficient Hydroxyapatite Coatings on Ti6Al4V Substrate, Mater. Charact., 
59, 129-33 (2008). 
22 R. Drevet, F. Velard, S. Potiron, D. Laurent-Maquin, and H. Benhayoune, In vitro Dissolution and 
Corrosion Study of Calcium Phosphate Coatings Elaborated by Pulsed Electrodeposition Current on 
Ti6Al4V Substrate, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med., 22, 753-61 (2011). 
23 T. Kokubo, F. Miyaji, H. M. Kim, and T. Nakamura, Spontaneous Formation of Bone-like Apatite 
Layer on Chemically Treated Titanium Metals, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 70, 1127-9 (1996). 
24 N. Temizel, G. Girisken, and A. C. Tas, Accelerated Transformation of Brushite to Octacalcium 
Phosphate in New Biomineralization Media between 36.5 C and 80 C, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 31, 1136-43 
(2011). 
25 C. Kim, M. R. Kendall, M. A. Miller, C. L. Long, P. R. Larson, M. B. Humphrey, A. S. Madden, and 
A. C. Tas, Comparison of Titanium soaked in 5 M NaOH or 5 M KOH Solutions, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 
33, 327-39 (2013). 
26 A. L. Boskey and A. S. Posner, Magnesium Stabilization of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate: A 
Kinetic Study, Mater. Res. Bull., 9, 907-16 (1974).  
27 D. D. Lee, C. Rey, M. Aiolova, and A. Tofighi, Method of Preparing a Poorly Crystalline Calcium 
Phosphate and Methods of its Use. U.S. Patent No. 7,517,539  April 14, 2009. 
28 W. H. Stein and S. Moore, The Free Amino Acids of Human Blood Plasma, J. Biol. Chem., 211, 915-
26 (1954). 
29 A. M. Lewis, C. Waterhouse, and L. S. Jacobs, Whole-blood and Plasma Amino Acid Analysis: Gas-
liquid and Cation-exchange Chromatography Compared, Clin. Chem., 26, 271-6 (1980). 
30 M. T. Conconi, M. Tommasini, E. Muratori, and P. P. Parnigotto, Essential Amino Acids Increased 
the Growth and Alkaline Phosphatase Activity in Osteoblasts Cultured in vitro. Il, Farmaco., 56, 755-61 
(2001). 
31 K. Imamura, Y. Kawasaki, T. Nagayasu, T. Sakiyama, and K. Nakanishi, Adsorption Characteristics 
of Oligopeptides Composed of Acidic and Basic Amino Acids on Titanium Surfaces, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 
103, 7-12 (2007). 
32 A. Tentorio and L. Canova, Adsorption of 
-amino Acids on Spherical TiO2 Particles, Colloid 
Surface, 39, 311-9 (1989). 
 
93
ONE-POT SYNTHESIS OF MONODISPERSE NANOSPHERES OF AMORPHOUS 
CALCIUM PHOSPHATE (ACP) IN A SIMPLE BIOMINERALIZATION MEDIUM 
 
A. Cuneyt Tas 
Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA 
 
ABSTRACT 
An inorganic solution similar to the inorganic electrolyte compartment of the DMEM 
(Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium) cell culture medium is developed. This biomineralization 
medium contains 44.05 mM HCO3
-, 126.86 mM Na+, 93.37 mM Cl-, 5.33 mM K+, 2.26 mM 
Ca2+, 0.905 mM H2PO4
-, and 0.81 mM Mg2+. Its Ca/P molar ratio is set to be identical with that 
of human blood plasma, i.e., 2.50. The medium is free of any Tris or Hepes but maintains a pH 
of 7.45 both at 37 and 65 C. The first novelty of this solution is it has the unique ability to 
homogeneously coat X-ray-amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) on glass slides vertically 
immersed in it and kept at 37 C for less than 48 h. The second innovative aspect of this solution 
is it has the unprecedented ability to produce monodisperse ACP nanospheres with diameters of 
about 180 nm when simply heated at 65 C for 1 h while being stirred. The third novelty of this 
solution is it only forms ACP and it does not form apatite in stark contrast to many other 
synthetic calcification or biomineralization solutions (media) known. Samples were 
characterized by XRD, FTIR, EDXS, BET, SEM, TEM, ICP-AES and contact angle goniometry. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The nucleation of crystalline calcium phosphates in aqueous solutions is occasionally 
preceded by the formation of amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) 1-6 . Abbona and Baronnet 
7 , Brecevic et al. 8 , and Christoffersen et al. 9  were among the first to report such early-
forming (i.e., within the first few minutes of synthesis) ACP nanoparticles by using electron 
microscopy. If such ACP nanoparticles were not intentionally stabilized by adding Mg2+, 
pyrophosphate or carbonate ions 10  to the synthesis media, then they transform into crystalline 
octacalcium phosphate (OCP, Ca8(HPO4)2(PO4)4 5H2O) or non-stoichiometric apatitic calcium 
phosphate with an increase in aging time, even in their native precipitation solutions 11-19 . 
ACP is a high solubility calcium phosphate phase; more soluble, at pH 6 to 7, than 
stoichiometric hydroxyapatite (HA, Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2), 
-tricalcium phosphate ( -TCP, 
-
Ca3(PO4)2), 
-tricalcium phosphate ( -Ca3(PO4)2) and tetracalcium phosphate (TTCP, 
Ca4(PO4)2O) 20 . The most common method of ACP powder synthesis by the simultaneous use 
of ACP stabilizers in synthesis solutions, such as Mg2+, P2O7
4- and HCO3
- ions, was disclosed by 
Lee et al. 21  in relation to the industrial-scale production of ACP powders for a specific bone 
cement formulation. This patented procedure is comprised of rapidly adding a solution of Ca-
nitrate tetrahydrate (100 mM) and Mg-chloride hexahydrate (2.7 mM) to a highly alkaline 
solution containing sodium hydroxide (700 mM), disodium hydrogen phosphate (115 mM), 
sodium bicarbonate (200 mM) and sodium pyrophosphate (2.5 mM) under vigorous stirring at 
room temperature 21 . If one removes the pyrophosphate and Mg ions (ACP stabilizers) and the 
excessive sodium hydroxide from the synthesis recipe of Lee et al. 21, 22 , the resultant solids 
would only be cryptocrystalline (i.e., poorly crystalline) calcium phosphate but not X-ray-
amorphous at all 23 .  
The aforementioned synthesis procedure, which is devoid of any organic additives, 
consisted of two-steps, involving the preparation of two separate solutions and their rapid mixing 
with one another. Furthermore, if the calcium ions were in one solution and the protonated 
phosphate (HPO4
2-) ions were in another solution as in the procedure of Lee et al. 21, 22 , then 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
94
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
such “strike precipitation” processes would not produce ACP precipitates with well-defined 
geometrical shapes, such as spheres. The characteristic non-spherical ACP precipitates of these 
two-step processes look quite similar in particle morphology to those reported in 1977 by Eanes 
and Meyer 24 . The readers are suggested to examine the hydrated, feather-like aggregated 
particles depicted in the Figure 11 of reference 24.  
To the best of author’s knowledge, the literature for the one-pot, single step synthesis of 
submicron- or nano-spheres of ACP, especially in the absence of any organic additives, is 
difficult to come by 10, 25 . Synthesizing ACP powders from an initially precipitate-free, single 
solution (also free of any organic substances which are not present in the human metabolism) at 
the physiological pH (7.4) still remained as a challenge. The goal of the current study is to 
develop a single solution and a simple process which shall in situ produce submicron- or nano-
spheres of ACP upon heating that solution from room temperature to a moderate temperature, 
such as 65 C, in glass reactors. 
In developing such a solution one starts by noting that Mg2+ (at 1.5 mM) and HCO3
- (at 
27 mM) ions, both being strong ACP stabilizers 10, 25 , are present in human blood plasma. 
The current author was the first to develop a biomimetic process using a Tris-buffered SBF 
(synthetic body fluid) solution having 27 mM HCO3
- (i.e., the exact bicarbonate concentration of 
blood plasma) and 1.5 mM Mg2+ to synthesize amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) powders 
consisting of 20-30 nm particles (with a BET surface area 160 m2/g) in that solution 26-28  at 
37 C and pH 7.4. However, that SBF solution contained Tris (tris-hydroxymethyl-
aminomethane, (HOCH2)3CNH2) to fix the pH at 7.4. Tris is not present at all in the human 
metabolism. The goal of the current study is to synthesize nanospheres of ACP in a solution 
which is free of Tris but still has a pH of 7.4. Barrere et al. 29 , in a follow-up to our studies 26, 
27 , showed that multiplying the HCO3
- concentration of the severely HCO3
--deficient Kokubo 
SBF (i.e., only 4.2 mM) 30, 31  by a factor of 5 (to attain 21 mM; still significantly short of the 
27 mM level of the blood plasma) would produce ACP precipitates instead of cryptocrystalline 
apatitic calcium phosphate. 
To provide a historical perspective, Earle’s balanced salt solution (EBSS) 32 , developed 
in 1943, is one of the first synthetic biomineralization media (although at the time of their 
development researchers did not see such solutions as versatile milieu to perform in vitro 
biomineralization and biomimetic synthesis studies) to mimic the ion concentrations of blood 
plasma without using any Tris or Hepes (2-(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinyl)ethane sulphonic 
acid, C8H18N2O4S). Hepes, like Tris, is also not present in the human blood. EBSS solution had a 
HCO3
- (bicarbonate ion) concentration of 26.2 mM (close to that of human blood, 27 mM) and a 
Ca/P molar ratio of 1.8 (in stark contrast to that of human blood, which is 2.50). The pH value 
(7.4) of EBSS solution is identical with that of blood.  
Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS) 33 , developed in 1949, was again a medium free 
of any Tris of Hepes, but quite deficient in its HCO3
- concentration (4.2 mM) and Ca/P molar 
ratio (1.6) in comparison to those of blood. Tyrode solution, with a Ca/P molar ratio of 4.5 and 
HCO3
- concentration of 12 mM, is a Tris- or Hepes-free basal salt medium 34 . Krebs-Ringer 
bicarbonate buffer (KRBB) 35 , developed in 1932, is a Tris/Hepes-free solution which raises 
the HCO3
- concentration of the Ringer solution 36  from zero to 27 mM, i.e., to that of blood 
plasma.  
Solution formulations commonly used in the culturing of mammalian cells were the 
major inspiration points for the current study. Cell culture solutions, which were developed 
decades before the Kokubo SBF 30, 31 , contain Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, K+, HPO4
2-, Cl- and HCO3
- 
ions in concentrations similar to those found in the blood plasma. A recent article by Boccaccini 
et al. 37  disclosed that the Tris-buffer present in the SBF (simulated/synthetic body fluid) 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
95
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
solutions 30, 31  was causing an increased dissolution of the surface constituents of bioglass 
and glass-ceramic samples soaked in it and therefore led to the premature crystallization of 
apatite on sample surfaces, tarnishing the reliability of those so-called in vitro bioactivity 
measurements based on such SBF solutions. Tris is known to be a calcium chelator 38 .  
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), for instance, is a commercially available 
medium widely used for cell culture supporting the growth of mammalian cells, and its 
formulation is inspired by the Eagle’s minimum essential medium 39-41 . DMEM solutions 
(Ca/P molar ratio = 1.99) possess a number of amino acids, vitamins, inorganic salts and can be 
obtained either in liquid or powder form, also with or without Hepes buffer and phenol red. 
DMEM solutions contain 44 mM HCO3
-, the highest concentration of bicarbonate ions among 
any such media. The original Eagle’s minimum essential medium formulation, on the other hand, 
had a HCO3
- concentration of 23.8 mM 39, 40 . 
We previously reported the complete transformation of brushite (DCPD, dicalcium 
phosphate dihydrate, CaHPO4 2H2O) powders in less than a week to octacalcium phosphate 
(OCP), but not to apatitic calcium phosphate, when a commercial DMEM solution was used as 
the soak test medium at 37 C 
42 . The removal of all the amino acids, vitamins, 
glucose/dextrose, phenol red, Hepes and pyruvate from the DMEM formulation and raising the 
Ca/P molar ratio of thus modified form of biomineralization solution from 1.99 to 2.50 led to 
observing much faster transformation of DCPD powders to OCP in comparison to DMEM 43 .  
This study reports a newly discovered ability of an easy-to-prepare, initially precipitate-
free, Tris- or Hepes-free solution we formulated, with a HCO3
- concentration of 44 mM, a pH of 
7.4, and a Ca/P molar ratio of 2.50,  
(i) to form submicron spheres of X-ray-amorphous calcium phosphate in powder form only upon 
heating the solution to 65 C or  
(ii) to in situ deposit spherulites of ACP (at 37 C) on ordinary glass slides immersed in them.  
 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Calcium chloride dihydrate ( 99.5%, CaCl2 2H2O, Fisher Scientific, Catalog No: C79), 
magnesium chloride hexahdyrate ( 99.5%, MgCl2 6H2O, Fisher, No: AC19753), potassium 
chloride ( 99.5%, KCl, Sigma, No: P3911), sodium hydrogen carbonate ( 99.9%, NaHCO3, 
Merck, No: 106329), sodium chloride ( 99.8%, NaCl, Merck, No: 106404), and sodium 
dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate ( 99.9%, NaH2PO4 H2O, EMD chemicals, No: SX07101) 
were used in solution preparation. One may also use NaH2PO4 if NaH2PO4 H2O would be 
unavailable. The use of anhydrous CaCl2, in place of CaCl2 2H2O, is not recommended since it is 
a highly hygroscopic substance and may cause inaccurate Ca2+ concentrations in the resultant 
solutions. Freshly boiled (to remove any dissolved bicarbonate ions originating from the 
prolonged contact of the water reservoir with laboratory atmosphere) de-ionized water (18.2 
M ) was used in all experiments.  
One liter of the new biomineralization medium of this study was prepared by adding the 
indicated amounts of chemicals in Table 1, in the order given, to 998 mL of pre-boiled deionized 
water. As-prepared solutions had a pH value (7.45 0.05 at both room temperature, 22 1 C, and 
65 0.3 C) similar to that of blood plasma. ACP powder syntheses were performed in heat-
sterilized (130 C, 8 h) and unused Pyrex  glass media bottles. Inorganic ion concentrations 
shown in Table 1 strictly mimic those of the DMEM solutions with the only exception of Ca2+. 
The calcium concentration of the original DMEM solution was intentionally increased in this 
study from 1.80 to 2.26 mM to attain a Ca/P molar ratio of 2.50 (i.e., that of human blood) in the 
biomineralization medium. The solutions were stored in clean and sealed glass bottles in a 
96
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
refrigerator (+4 C) when not in use. The ion concentrations of the solution of this study (Table 1) 
are compared in Table 2 with other solutions mentioned in the previous chapter. 
 
Table 1 Biomineralization medium preparation (1 liter) 
Chemical 
Amount 
g/L 
Ion 
Concentration
mM 
NaCl 
4.7865 
Na+ 
126.86 
KCl 
0.3974 
K+ 
5.33 
MgCl2 6H2O 
0.1655 
Mg2+ 
0.81 
CaCl2 2H2O 
0.3323 
HCO3
- 
44.05 
NaHCO3 
3.7005 
Cl- 
93.37 
NaH2PO4 H2O 
0.1250 
Ca2+ 
2.26 
 
 
H2PO4
- 
0.905 
 
Table 2 
Compositions of media mentioned or developed in this study (ions in mM) 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 
 
Na+ 
K+ 
Mg2+ Ca2+ 
P 
 
HCO3
- Cl- 
SO4
2- 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Plasma  
142 
5 
1.5 
2.5 
1 
 
27 
103 
0.5 
SBF [53] 
142 
5 
1.5 
2.5 
1 
 
27 
103 
0.5 
Ringer [36] 
113.6 1.88 
– 
1.08 
– 
 
2.38 
115.3 – 
HBSS [33] 
141.8 5.33 
0.79 
1.8 
0.86 
 
4.05 
146.6 0.42 
Tyrode [34] 
149.1 2.7 
0.53 
1.8 
0.33 
 
11.9 
144 
– 
EBSS [32] 
143.4 5.36 
0.83 
1.8 
1.04 
 
26.2 
125.3 0.83 
KRBB [35] 
143.4 5.88 
1.25 
2.52 
1.18 
 
25 
128.2 1.25 
DMEM [42] 
127 
5.33 
0.81 
1.80 
0.905  
44.05 90.8 
– 
This study 
127 
5.33 
0.81 
2.26 
0.905  
44.05 93.4 
– 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Note: DMEM solutions also contain amino acids, vitamins and glucose. 
 
ACP formation on ordinary optical microscope slide glasses was achieved by vertically 
inserting a slide (Fisher Scientific, 60 x 20 x 1 mm) into a glass media bottle (100 mL-capacity) 
containing 100 mL of the solution of Table 1. The bottle containing the vertically-placed glass 
slide was kept undisturbed in an oven at 37 C for 48 h. The glass slide was then washed with 
500 mL of deionized water and dried at RT for 36 h in air. 
Any desired volume of the solution described in Table 1 was placed in a Pyrex  glass 
media bottle of proper capacity. The screw-capped bottle (with a thermometer attached to a hole 
in its plastic cap) was placed on a hot-plate and heated to 65 1 C in about 20-25 minutes and the 
solution in it was constantly stirred at 750 rpm by using a magnetic stir bar (1 cm diameter and 5 
cm-long stir bar used in a 500 mL bottle). The total heating time at the constant temperature of 
65 C was 60 minutes. The first ten minutes of that 60 min was the incubation time, in which the 
solution did not exhibit any visible turbidity. At around the 10th minute at 65 C, the solution first 
displayed a bluish tint (the onset of ACP nanosphere formation) for a short while (typically 15-
20 seconds) and then rapidly went turbid and milky. The synthesis procedure is this simple. The 
resultant fine particles were separated from their mother solution by centrifugation at 10000 rpm 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
97
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
or by filtering through a 0.22 μm filter membrane and then washed with 1 L of deionized water, 
followed by drying for 36 h at RT in air. 
Prior to powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR) analyses, the dried samples were manually ground in an agate mortar by using an agate 
pestle. XRD runs were performed (Advance D8, Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany and Ultima IV, 
Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan) in the step scan mode, with a step size of 0.03  and preset time of 3 
seconds. The powder diffractometers were equipped with Cu tubes and operated at 40 kV and 40 
mA. XRD powder samples were prepared by gently packing the powders into single-crystal 
quartz sample holders with a cavity of around 1 mm-deep. ACP-coated glass samples were X-
rayed as is. The wettability of ACP-coated glass slides (versus as is glass slides) was determined 
by using an OCA 15 Plus (DataPhysics Instruments, Filderstadt, Germany) contact angle 
goniometer via the static sessile drop method (3 L drop volume) with deionized water at RT. 
The contact angle goniometer photographs, which served as the sole comparison tool for 
wettability differences in the specimens of this study, were originally captured as a 15 minute 
continuous movie at the rate of 25 frame-per-second (fps). FTIR samples were mixed with KBr 
powders at the ratio of 1 mg sample-to-250 mg KBr in an agate mortar. FTIR pellets with a 
diameter of 12.5 mm were pressed at a load of 10 tons applied for 1 min. FTIR data were 
collected (Spectrum One, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) using 256 scans at 2 cm-1 resolution.  
Samples for field emission-scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (Zeiss-Neon 40 EsB, Oberkochen, Germany) were not ground and 
small portions of samples embedded on conducting carbon tapes were sputter-coated with a thin 
(approx. 5 nm thick) layer of gold-palladium prior to imaging at 5 kV at a working distance of 6 
mm. Transmission electron microscopy (JEOL 2010F, Tokyo, Japan) was used at 200 kV to 
analyze the ACP powders, after placing a tiny drop of ethyl alcohol suspension of the powders 
onto a Cu grid. Quantitative chemical analyses of powder samples were performed by using 
inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Model 61E, Thermo 
Electron, Madison, WI). For the ICP-AES analyses, 75 mg portions of powder samples were 
dissolved in 5 mL of concentrated HNO3 solution.  
The BET surface area of powder samples was determined by applying the standard 
Brunauer–Emmett–Teller method to the nitrogen adsorption isotherm obtained at -196°C using a 
Quantachrome, Nova 2000e (Boynton Beach, FL) instrument.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Glass slides vertically immersed into the biomineralization media (at 37 C) similar to 
amino acids-, vitamins-, Hepes-, glucose/dextrose-, pyruvate-free DMEM solution were covered 
with a monolayer of calcium phosphate visible to the naked eye in 48 h (Fig. 1a). Glass slides 
kept in the solutions for only 24 h (data not shown) were also covered with CaP (calcium 
phosphate) but the surface coverage was not as complete as those of 48 h samples. X-ray 
diffraction (XRD) analyses showed that the deposited CaP was x-ray- amorphous (Fig. 1b). The 
large hump (from 10 to 40  2 ) seen in Fig. 1b was due to the base silicate glass. Solution-
precipitated CaPs (such as those obtained in SBF solutions) typically exhibit moderately high 
intensity X-ray peaks at 25.89  and at 31.78-to-34.05  2 , and such apatitic CaP peaks were 
absent in Fig. 1b. 
 
Field emission-scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) photomicrographs of glass slides 
vertically immersed in solution for 48 h at 37 C given in Figs. 1c and 1d, at increasing 
magnifications, displayed the extent of surface coverage. The high resolution image of Fig. 1d 
depicted that the ACP deposits covering the glass slide surface were actually comprised of 
aggregates of approximately 20 nm spheroidal particles. Figure 1e shows the surface of a similar 
ACP-coated glass slide (but without any Au/Pd sputter-coating) taken at the same magnification 
98
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
with that of Fig. 1d. Therefore, those 20 nm spheroidal particles are not an artifact of sputter-
coating. Both of Figs. 1d and 1e provide some evidence that the vacuum in sputter coating causes 
the formation of microcracks on the ACP layer deposited on glass slides. The qualitative energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) data of the ACP-coated glass slides were quite similar to 
those depicted later in Fig. 3b and the deposited layer contained Ca, P and Mg. The monolayer of 
ACP deposited on glass slides was about 200 nm-thick (Fig. 1c). 
 
 
Fig. 1 (a) digital camera photo, (b) characteristic XRD spectrum, (c) & (d) low and high 
resolution FE-SEM images of ACP-coated glass slides upon vertical immersion in 
the solution of Table 1 at 37 C for 48 h. 
 
The as is glass slides were not hydrophilic at all, however, the ACP-coated glass slides 
displayed a significant wettability as shown in the contact angle goniometry data of Fig. 2.  
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Contact angle goniometry images of static sessile drop on glass slides, left 
column: as is glass, right column: ACP-coated glass (still photos extracted from a 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
99
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
15 min movie recorded at 25 fps, image labels=elapsed seconds after the drop 
touched the surface). 
 
The as is glass sample (with an initial contact angle of about 51-53 ) is shown in the left 
column of Fig. 2, as a function of the elapsed time (in seconds) upon the contact of the sessile 
drop with the surface. The contact angle of the as is glass sample did not change noticeably with 
the elapsed time. ACP-coated glass slide is shown in the right column of Fig. 2, and the initial 
contact angle was around 26-28 . The apparent contact angle of the ACP-coated glass sample 
dropped to 11  after 2 s and to about 2  after 25 s (Fig. 2). The initial drop had the tendency to 
spread on the ACP-coated glass surface. Contact angle on a surface is defined by the Young 
equation and the shape of a drop resting on a surface depends on the material properties of the 
drop, the atmosphere surrounding it, and most importantly the surface on which it was placed 
44 . Under the light of the contact angle goniometry data given in Fig. 2, the simple solution 
technique described here seemed to be effective in turning a hydrophobic surface into a surface 
of remarkable wettability, and the investigation of the applicability of this solution technique to 
hydrophobic biopolymer and bioceramic surfaces warrants further research. 
 
The powders synthesized by simply heating the biomineralization solution at 65 C for 1 h 
were found to be X-ray-amorphous (Fig. 3a). The EDXS data of the powders showed that they 
were Mg-doped ACP (Fig. 3b). ICP-AES analyses were performed on three different powders 
separately synthesized three times by using the same procedure. The amount of magnesium in 
the powders was found to be 0.16, 0.14 and 0.17 wt% in these ICP-AES runs. Na, K, and Cl 
contents of the powders were both below the 80 ppm blank level. On the other hand, Ca/P molar 
ratio of the same powders was determined to be 1.30, 1.34 and 1.29 along the same ICP-AES 
runs used to determine the above Mg contents. These numbers are given separately since 
reporting the average values might have hidden the slight batch-to-batch variations in those. The 
Ca/P molar ratios of the powders of this study agreed well with those reported by Christoffersen 
et al. 45 . The current study unfortunately lacked any quantitative C analyses to determine the 
carbonate content of powders.  
Figure 3c showed the characteristic FTIR spectra of these powders. The samples were 
carbonated, as indicated by the strong bands observed at 1490-1427 and 869 cm-1. The bands for 
the P-O vibrations of the orthophosphate group are similar to those previously observed for 
amorphous calcium phosphates 46 , and are found at 1053, 950 and 570 cm-1. Further 
confirmation of the X-ray-amorphous nature of these samples came from the single broad band 
at around 570 cm-1 25 . The band at 700 cm-1 shall not be confused with that of the P2O7
4- group 
usually seen at 727 to 740 cm-1. The strong bands of water vibrations at 3350 and 1650 cm-1 
prove the hydrated nature of these samples. The complete IR band assignments to ACP samples 
were reported elsewhere 10, 25, 27, 47 . 
 
The X-ray-amorphous powders obtained by heating the biomineralization solution at 
65 C for 1 h were comprised of spheres with diameters ranging from 105 to 195 nm, as shown in 
the SEM photomicrographs given in Figs. 3d and 3e. The average particle diameter was 
determined to be 176 29 nm, which was calculated by using the Heyn’s lineal intercept method 
(in accord with ASTM standard E112-10) 48  based on the results of 60 measurements on the 
image given in Fig. 3d. The BET (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller) surface area of the powders of Figs. 
3d and 3e was 186, 183, and 189 m2/g for three different samples obtained from three 
reproduction syntheses. The 176 nm spheres of the powders were similar to the ACP deposited 
on glass slides at 37 C (i.e., Figs. 1c and 1d) and they were comprised of aggregates of smaller 
spheroids with the mean diameter of about 20 nm (Fig. 3e). 
100
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
 
The TEM study performed on the powders, which were synthesized by heating the 
biomineralization solution at 65 C for 1 h, depicted that the imaged nanospheres cannot be 
named as completely amorphous (Fig. 3f). While the image of Fig. 3f itself was showing short-
range order confined to discrete nano-domains only, the SAED (selected-area electron 
diffraction) pattern in its inset exhibited weak and incompletely presented diffraction spots which 
can be indexed with the (002) and (211) reflections of Ca-deficient, carbonated apatitic calcium 
phosphate. One may also consider freeze-drying the ACP precipitates immediately after 
removing them from their mother liquor in contrast to our RT-drying procedure. Amorphous, 
and hydrated, substances would pose the risk of partially transforming into cryptocrystalline 
materials while analyzing them using a 200 kV TEM electron beam. Nevertheless, it is a well-
known fact that indisputably amorphous materials can only be produced by rapidly quenching a 
molten substance from elevated temperatures. 
 
 
 Fig. 3 
ACP nanospheres synthesized in the solution presented in Table 1 upon heating 
the solution at 65 C for 1 h; (a) XRD, (b) EDXS, (c) FTIR, (d) & (e) low and high 
resolution FE-SEM images, (f) TEM image and SAED pattern. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
101
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
The experiments of this study which were presented above under two categories; (i) static 
(i.e., no stirring) coating on vertically positioned glass slides at 37 C over time periods measured 
in days and (ii) rapid (measured in minutes) precipitation from an agitated, stirred solution at 
65 C, actually correspond to the two facets of the same thermodynamic phase separation 
phenomenon: thermal decomposition of the solution given in Table 1. This solution does not 
precipitate any ACP or cryptocrystalline apatitic CaP as long as it is kept refrigerated at 4 C. 
However, if it is kept in a sealed glass bottle in a warm and non-cooled room (e.g., during the 
summer months) whose temperature may readily exceed 30 C, it in situ precipitates ACP. This 
observation became the starting point for this research. 
Posner clusters (i.e., Ca9(PO4)6), with sizes close to 0.8 nm, are present in supersaturated 
and metastable CaP solutions claimed to simulate the electrolyte portion of blood plasma, as 
experimentally proved by Oyane et al. using dynamic light scattering 49 . Directly quoting from 
the work of Posner 50, 51 , in the process of ACP formation in solution, Ca9(PO4)6 clusters form 
first (with the experimental support to this provided by the later work of Oyane et al. 49 ) and 
then are aggregated randomly to produce the larger spherical particles with the inter-cluster 
space filled with water. The solution of Table 1 shall have the similar Posner clusters prior to its 
in situ precipitation of ACP when it is warmed up. 
The solution of Table 1, being similar to the inorganic electrolyte portion of a DMEM 
cell culture medium, has a high ionic strength associated with a HCO3
- concentration 1.632 times 
that of the human blood plasma. The ionic strength of the solution of this study (i.e., 141.4 mM) 
is calculated by using the below formula.  
 
 
      Ca2+ 
 
Na+ 
                H2PO4
- 
            Cl- 
I = ½ [(2.26x10-3)(2)2 + (126.86x10-3)(1)2 + (0.905x10-3)(1)2 + (93.37x10-3)(1)2  +  
        HCO3
- 
                 K+                     Mg2+ 
        
+(44.05x10-3)(1)2 + (5.33x10-3)(1)2 + (0.81x10-3)(2)2 ] =0.1414 M=141.4 mM              (1) 
 
On the other hand, the ionic strength of the inorganic electrolyte portion of human blood 
plasma is 149.5 mM and this ionic strength value is strictly observed in designing and preparing, 
for instance, biomimetic SBF solutions buffered using the pair of Na-lactate and lactic acid 52, 
53 . The solution of Table 1 has lower Mg2+, Ca2+, Na+, Cl- and phosphate concentrations in 
comparison to blood plasma. Similarly, this solution’s HCO3
- concentration is much higher than 
that of blood plasma, as mentioned above, and HCO3
- is a stabilizer of ACP. The low NaCl and 
high bicarbonate amount of this solution, which is similar to DMEM, is why it does not lead to 
apatite precipitation. The ACP-stabilizing power of the solution of Table 1 resulted from its high 
HCO3
- concentration and lower amounts of other ions.   
It is a routine practice to bring the distilled/deionized water, which will later be used in a 
synthesis reaction, to a rolling boil for a few minutes to drive off any dissolved bicarbonate ions 
from water in the form of CO2 gas. The same procedure was practiced for water used in this 
study to ensure the attainment of the correct HCO3
- concentration stated in Table 1. The merit of 
heating/boiling of water is explained by the below reactions. It is not even necessary to boil the 
water to drive these reactions; warm water in comparison to cold water will allow these 
degassing reactions to proceed faster. To draw an analogy with the large-scale meaning of the 
below reactions, some environmental agencies are continuously monitoring the sea surface 
102
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
temperatures (SST), especially over the equatorial oceans which contain vast reserves of HCO3
-
(aq) 54  
 
HCO3
-(aq) + H+(aq) 
 CO2(aq) + H2O 
 
 
 
(2a) 
CO2(aq) 
 CO2(g) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2b). 
In biology, on the other hand, CO2 is a key metabolite in all living organisms and it exists in 
equilibrium with HCO3
-. Enzyme carbonic anhydrase regulates the completely reversible 
reaction (2a) between aqueous HCO3
- and dissolved CO2 55 . 
The role of Equations (2a) and (2b) on the formation of those 20 nm-diameter 
fundamental (i.e., building block) nanospheroids/nanospheres, which then aggregate to form the 
larger ones, depicted in the high magnification FE-SEM image of Fig. 1d (and partly in Fig. 3e) 
is crucial to determine. It might be unrealistic to think that in a solution heated to 65 C the initial 
HCO3
- concentration would still remain unchanged. Posner clusters of 0.8 nm diameter are 
present in a precipitate-free CaP solution 49, 56 , their inter-cluster space is filled with the 
electrolyte solution 51 , and the degassing equations of (2a) and (2b) becomes operational 
exactly in that inter-cluster liquid with an increase in the temperature of the solution. Did an 
increase in the solution temperature from RT to 37  or from RT to 65 C cause an increase in the 
sizes of those fundamental nanospheroids? The common size (i.e., 20 nm) acquired by those 
shown both in Fig. 1d (37 C) and Fig. 3e (65 C) is noteworthy in asserting that this size seemed 
to be temperature-independent. 
Yin and Stott 56  postulated that a Posner cluster is bound by 6 protons (H+) and, 
therefore, is a positively charged entity. To maintain local charge neutrality, it will be reasonable 
to assume that the positively-charged Posner clusters are surrounded by negatively-charged 
bicarbonate and hydroxyl ions (also with Cl-) in a supersaturated and metastable solution such as 
the solution of Table 1 of this study. This coordination shall persist until the 10th minute of the 
incubation period along which no turbidity or tint in the solution is observed. However, if and 
when equation (2a) becomes operational, a significant fraction of the coordinating bicarbonate 
ions may be gradually eliminated while taking some of the H+ away with them (i.e., 
deprotonation) and leaving the OH- and Cl- behind. This may represent the moment of transition 
from Posner clusters to Ca-deficient apatitic CaP nanodomains shown in the TEM image of Fig. 
3f. Moreover, when equation (2b) becomes operational simultaneously with  equation (2a); and 
if microscopic bubbles of CO2(g) starts forming in the inter-cluster spaces of Posner clusters, 
then those newly created local liquid-gas interfaces may act as the preferential sites for 
heterogeneous nucleation of those 20 nm-diameter fundamental nanospheroids (of Fig. 1d). Such 
speculations need to be confirmed by experimental observations, albeit its difficulty in achieving 
with the current level of in situ microscopic imaging technology pertinent to aqueous solutions at 
the nanoscale. 
 
If one prepares a new solution similar to that of Table 1, without any NaHCO3 addition, 
this solution mainly precipitates brushite (CaHPO4 2H2O) upon its heating to 37 C. Likewise, if 
one prepares another solution similar to that of Table 1, without any MgCl2 6H2O but with 
NaHCO3, the new solution precipitates cryptocrystalline (i.e., poorly crystalline) apatitic calcium 
phosphate, but not X-ray-amorphous CaP upon heating to 37 C. These are experimental 
observations based on our previous studies related to biomineralization media development 26, 
27, 43, 53 . Therefore, there seems to be two key constituents of the solution of Table 1: (1) 
HCO3- (aq), (2) Mg2+ (aq) to impart it the ability to produce ACP nanospheres, instead of 
cryptocrystalline apatitic CaP, upon simple heating. These two constituents, being effective ACP 
stabilizers 57 , at their stated concentrations, apparently ensured the formation of ACP 
nanospheres with mean sizes less than 180 nm. Nevertheless, to complicate the matters further, 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
103
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
this does not mean that any saline solution containing Mg2+ and HCO3
- at any concentration can 
form ACP nanospheres within this size range. Dorozhkin et al. 58  tested the influence of Mg2+ 
and HCO3
- in SBF-like solutions at 4, 8 and 16 times above the normal concentrations, however, 
the resultant powders consisted only of cryptocrystalline apatitic CaP.  
Zhou and Bhaduri 59  was able to form spheres of CaP over the diametrical size range of 
250 to 450 nm but were not able produce single phase ACP. Their samples were contaminated 
with unidentified phase(s) of significant crystallinity as confirmed by their XRD data, although 
they increased the Mg2+ concentration of their SBF-like solutions to 8 or 24 times that of the 
human blood plasma. Zhou and Bhaduri 59  were only forming cryptocrystalline apatitic CaP 
(with XRD peaks at 25.89  and at 31.78-to-34.05  2 ) when they kept the Mg2+ concentration of 
their solutions at the level of blood plasma. In contrast to the above, the solution of Table 1, 
similar to DMEM but devoid of amino acids, vitamins, and alike, has its Mg2+ concentration 
fixed at about half that of the blood plasma. In other words, the solution of this study did not 
necessitate an increased Mg2+ content in order to suppress the formation of cryptocrystalline 
apatitic CaP. 
 
It is relatively easy for materials scientists to synthesize spheres of CaP in laboratory 
glassware. The main question here is: do these in vitro globules/spheres resemble the 
morphology of the calcospherites of bone tissue during biological bone remodeling in vivo? The 
answer to this question is positive and an amazingly strong evidence for such resemblance is 
given in Figs. 10 and 11 of the article by Sela 60 . The readers are advised to compare those 
SEM images 60  with the SEM photomicrographs presented in this study. Moreover, submicron 
spherical ACP particles were found in the teeth of chitons 61 . ACP is known to first transform 
into OCP and then to cryptocrystalline apatitic CaP during its maturation in biological fluids, 
such as blood, urine, saliva and milk 62 . 
 
 The addition of organics into inorganic synthesis solutions are known to alter the size 
and shape distribution of precipitates obtained. The influence of water soluble bovine gelatin 
(which is a balanced concoction of amino acids 63 ) added (at levels from 1 to 1120 mg/L) to 
equimolar solutions (free of K+, Mg2+, and HCO3
-) of calcium chloride and sodium phosphate (6 
mM each) on the mean particle size of synthesized ACP particles was previously studied by 
Brecevic et al. 8 . They reported that at gelatin additions above 400 mg/L the ACP particles 
became monodisperse with diameters around 100 nm. Based on this previous study, we 
happened to be curious about adding much smaller amounts of bovine gelatin (Mallinckrodt 
Chemicals, Type B, Cat. No: H219-59) to the solution of Table 1 and repeat the synthesis 
procedure (65 C, 1 h) described in Chapter 2. The SEM image given in Fig. 4 shows the 120 nm-
diameter monodisperse ACP nanospheres obtained by dissolving gelatin (67 mg/L) in the 
solution of Table 1 prior to syntheses. The BET surface area of these ACP spheres, which were 
recovered from their mother liquor by centrifugation, was 174 23 m2/g. Ca/P molar ratio, Mg 
content (via ICP-AES analyses) and the XRD, FTIR, EDXS data of these gelatin-containing 
samples did not show any difference from the gelatin-free samples presented previously. 
Although we have thus shown that it would be possible to decrease the mean diameter of ACP 
spheres by using gelatin in this high ionic strength DMEM-like solution of this study, we still 
remain somewhat concerned about the possible in vivo toxicity of gelatin which may survive the 
routine precipitate washing procedures 64, 65 . 
 
The large surface area and high wettability ACP produced by the solution presented here 
is promising for biomedical and pharmaceutical applications where altering the physicochemical 
properties of the surfaces of synthetic biomaterials becomes a necessity. Such surface alterations 
can be readily achieved by static (non-stirred) immersion of synthetic biomaterials (polymeric, 
metallic or ceramic) into this solution. The superb wettability of the nano-textured ACP 
104
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
deposited on the surface (as shown here for flat glass substrates) would be useful in attaching 
blood proteins more readily to the surfaces of blood-contacting biomaterials. As stated by 
Vroman 66 , on a surface, upon its contact with blood plasma at least five proteins (i.e., 
albumin, globulins, fibrinogen, fibronectin, and high molecular weight kininogen) in succession 
displace each other only within the first minute. Finally, the ACP spheres with diameters in the 
vicinity of 180 nm can also be used as non-cytotoxic and biocompatible drug delivery agents. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 SEM image of ACP particles synthesized in a solution similar to that of Table 1 
but containing 67 mg/L gelatin in it (65 C for 1 h). 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
An aqueous solution, free of any organics, identical in its HCO3
-, Na+, K+, Mg2+, Cl- and 
phosphate ion concentrations with those of DMEM cell culture solutions was found to be able to 
deposit a 200 nm-thick monolayer of X-ray-amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) at the 
physiological temperature of 37 C, in less than 48 h, on glass slides vertically immersed into the 
solution. The ACP monolayer formed on glass slides was wetted by water at RT. The same 
solution was able to in situ form monodisperse nanospheres (having 176 nm mean diameter and 
185 m2/g BET surface area) of X-ray-amorphous ACP when heated at 65 C for 1 h under 
constant stirring. These two one-pot and simple synthesis processes mentioned above did not 
need any pH or ion concentration controls during the syntheses. 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
105
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
Notes
Certain commercial equipments, instruments, or chemicals are only identified in this article to 
foster understanding. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the 
author, nor does it imply that the equipment or chemicals identified are necessarily the best 
available for the purpose. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
Author gratefully acknowledges the generous help of Dr. Preston L. Larson and Dr. Andrew S. 
Madden of the University of Oklahoma for helping to perform some of the SEM and XRD 
analyses of this study, when the author was a visiting professor at the College of Dentistry of the 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center between 2010 and 2011. The author also thanks 
Dr. Sharukh Khajotia of the University of Oklahoma College of Dentistry for making the contact 
angle goniometer of his laboratory available for this work. 
 
REFERENCES 
1.
M. L. Watson and R. A. Robinson, “Collagen-Crystal Relationships in Bone. II Electron 
Microscope Study of Basic Calcium Phosphate Crystals,” Am. J. Anat., 1953, 93, 25-59. 
2.
A. S. Posner, C. Fairy and C. J. Dallemagne, “Defect Apatite Series in Synthetic and 
Natural Calcium Phosphates: The Concept of Pseudoapatites,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 
1954, 15, 304-305. 
3.
E. D. Eanes, I. H. Gillessen and A. S. Posner, “Intermediate States in the Precipitation of 
Hydroxyapatite,” Nature, 1965, 208, 365-367. 
4.
J. C. Weber, E. D. Eanes and R. J. Gerdes, “Electron Microscope Study of 
Noncrystalline Calcium Phosphate,” Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1967, 120, 723-724. 
5.
J. D. Termine, R. A. Peckauskas and A. S. Posner, “Calcium Phosphate Formation In 
Vitro II. Effects of Environment on Amorphous-Crystalline Transformation,” Arch. 
Biochem. Biophys., 1970, 140, 318-325. 
6.
A. L. Boskey, “Amorphous Calcium Phosphate: The Contention of Bone,” J. Dent. Res., 
1997, 76, 1433-1436. 
7.
F. Abbona and A. Baronnet, “A XRD and TEM Study on the Transformation of 
Amorphous Calcium Phosphate in the Presence of Magnesium,” J. Cryst. Growth, 1996, 
165, 98-105. 
8.
L. Brecevic, V. Hlady and H. Furedi-Milhofer, “Influence of Gelatin on the Precipitation 
of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate,” Colloid. Surface., 1987, 28, 301-313. 
9.
J. Christoffersen, M. R. Christoffersen, W. Kibalczyc and F. A. Andersen, “A 
Contribution to the Understanding of the Formation of Calcium Phosphates,” J. Cryst. 
Growth, 1989, 94, 767-777.  
10. C. Combes and C. Rey, “Amorphous Calcium Phosphates: Synthesis, Properties and 
Uses in Biomaterials,” Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 3362-3378. 
11. S. Kim, H. S. Ryu, H. Shin, H. S. Jung and K. S. Hong, “In Situ Observation of 
Hydroxyapatite Nanocrystal Formation from Amorphous Calcium Phosphate in 
Calcium-rich Solutions,” Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 91, 500-506. 
12. P. B. Y. Ofir, R. Govrin-Lippman, N. Garti and H. Furedi-Milhofer, “The Influence of 
Polyelectrolytes on the Formation and Phase Transformation of Amorphous Calcium 
Phosphate,” Cryst. Growth Des., 2004, 4, 177-183. 
106
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
13. J. H. Tao, H. H. Pan, Y. W. Zeng, X. R. Xu and R. K. Tang, “Roles of Amorphous 
Calcium Phosphate and Biological Additives in the Assembly of Hydroxyapatite 
Nanoparticles,” J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 13410-13418.  
14. H. H. Pan, X. Y. Liu, R. K. Tang and H. Y. Xu, “Mystery of the Transformation from 
Amorphous Calcium Phosphate to Hydroxyapatite,” Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7415-
7417. 
15. Z. Zyman, D. Rokhmistrov and V. Glushko, “Structural Changes in Precipitates and Cell 
Model for the Conversion of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate to Hydroxyapatite during 
the Initial Stage of Precipitation,” J. Cryst. Growth, 2012, 353, 5-11. 
16. M. Kazanci, P. Fratzl, K. Klaushofer and E. P. Paschalis, “Complementary Information 
on In Vitro Conversion of Amorphous (Precursor) Calcium Phosphate to Hydroxyapatite 
from Raman Microspectroscopy and Wide-Angle X-Ray Scattering,” Calcified Tissue 
Int., 2006, 79, 354-359. 
17. N. C. Blumenthal, J. M. Holmes and A. S. Posner, “Effect of Preparation Conditions on 
the Properties and Transformation of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate,” Mater. Res. Bull., 
1972, 7, 1181-1190.  
18. J. L. Meyer and C. C. Weatherall, “Amorphous to Crystalline Calcium Phosphate 
Transformation at Elevated pH,” J. Colloid Interf. Sci., 1982, 89, 257-267. 
19. M. S. Tung and W. E. Brown, “An Intermediate State in Hydrolysis of Amorphous 
Calcium Phosphate,” Calcified Tissue Int., 1983, 35, 783-790. 
20. K. A. Gross and C. C. Berndt, “Biomedical Applications of Apatites,” in Reviews in 
Mineralogy & Geochemistry, Vol. 48, Mineralogical Society of America, pp. 631-672 
(2002). 
21. D. D. Lee, C. Rey, M. Aiolova, and A. Tofighi, “Method of Preparing a Poorly 
Crystalline Calcium Phosphate and Methods of Its Use,” U.S. Patent No. 7,517,539  
April 14, 2009. 
22. D. Knaack, M. E. P. Goad, M. Aiolova, C. Rey, A. Tofighi, P. Chakravarthy and D. D. 
Lee, “Resorbable Calcium Phosphate Bone Substitute,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A, 1998, 
43, 399-409. 
23. S. Jalota, S. B. Bhaduri and A. C. Tas, “A New Rhenanite ( -NaCaPO4) and 
Hydroxyapatite Biphasic Biomaterial for Skeletal Repair,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B, 
2007, 80, 304-316. 
24. E. D. Eanes and J. L. Meyer, “The Maturation of Crystalline Calcium Phosphates in 
Aqueous Suspensions at Physiologic pH,” Calcif. Tiss. Res., 1977, 23, 259-269. 
25. S. V. Dorozhkin, “Amorphous Calcium (Ortho)phosphates,” Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 
4457-4475.  
26. D. Bayraktar and A. C. Tas, “Chemical Preparation of Carbonated Calcium 
Hydroxyapatite Powders at 37 C in Urea-containing Synthetic Body Fluids,” J. Eur. 
Ceram. Soc., 1999, 19, 2573-2579. 
27. A. C. Tas, “Synthesis of Biomimetic Ca-Hydroxyapatite Powders at 37 C in Synthetic 
Body Fluids,” Biomaterials, 2000, 21, 1429-1438. 
28. E. Landi, A. Tampieri, G. Celotti, R. Langenati, M. Sandri and S. Sprio, “Nucleation of 
Biomimetic Apatite in Synthetic Body Fluids: Dense and Porous Scaffold Development,” 
Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 2835-2845. 
29. F. Barrere, C. A. van Blitterswijk, K. de Groot and P. Layrolle, “Influence of Ionic 
Strength and Carbonate on the Ca-P Coating formation from SBFx5 Solution,” 
Biomaterials, 2002, 23, 1921-1930.  
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
107
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
30. T. Kokubo, H. Kushitani, S. Sakka, T. Kitsugi and T. Yamamuro, “Solutions able to 
Reproduce in vivo Surface-structure Changes in Bioactive Glass-ceramic A-W,” J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res., 1990, 24, 721-734. 
31. T. Kokubo and H. Takadama, “How Useful is SBF in predicting in vivo Bone 
Bioactivity?” Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 2907-2915. 
32. W. R. Earle, E. L. Schilling, T. H. Stark, N. P. Straus, M. F. Brown and E. Shelton, 
“Production of Malignancy in vitro. IV. The Mouse Fibroblast Cultures and Changes 
Seen in the Living Cells,” J. Natl. Cancer I., 1943, 4, 165-212. 
33. J. H. Hanks and R. E. Wallace, “Relation of Oxygen and Temperature in the Preservation 
of Tissues by Refrigeration,” P. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1949, 71, 196-200. 
34. M. V. Tyrode, “The Mode of Action of Some Purgative Salts,” Arch. Intern. 
Pharmacodyn., 1910, 17, 205-209. 
35. H. A. Krebs and K. Henseleit, “Untersuchungen ueber die Harnstoffbildung im 
Tierkoerper,” Hoppe-Seylers Z. Physiol. Chemie., 1932, 210, 33-66. 
36. S. Ringer, “Concerning the Influence Exerted by Each of the Constituents of the Blood 
on the Contraction of the Ventricle,” J. Physiol., 1882, 3, 380-393. 
37. D. Rohanova, A. R. Boccaccini, D. M. Yunos, D. Horkavcova, I. Brezovska and A. 
Helebrant, “Tris Buffer in Simulated Body Fluid Distorts the Assessment of Glass-
Ceramic Scaffold Bioactivity,” Acta Biomater., 2011, 7, 2623-2630. 
38. P. Premoli, A. Manzoni and C. Calzi, “Method for the Quantitative Determination of 
Calcium in Biological Fluids through Direct Potentiometry,” European Patent No: EP 
0153783 B1, October 30, 1991.  
39. H. Eagle, “Nutrition Needs of Mammalian Cells in Tissue Culture,” Science, 1955, 122, 
501-504. 
40. H. Eagle, “Amino Acid Metabolism in Mammalian Cell Cultures,” Science, 1959, 130, 
432-437. 
41. R. Dulbecco and G. Freeman, “Plaque Production by the Polyoma Virus,” Virology, 
1959, 8, 396-397. 
42. S. Mandel and A. C. Tas, “Brushite (CaHPO4 2H2O) to Octacalcium Phosphate 
(Ca8(HPO4)2(PO4)4 5H2O) transformation in DMEM solutions at 36.5 C,” Mater. Sci. 
Eng. C, 2010, 30, 245-254. 
43. N. Temizel, G. Girisken and A. C. Tas, “Accelerated Transformation of Brushite to 
Octacalcium Phosphate in New Biomineralization Media between 36.5  and 80 C,” 
Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2011, 31, 1136-1143.  
44. R. Tadmor, “Line Energy and the Relation between Advancing, Receding, and Young 
Contact Angles,” Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7659-7664. 
45. M. R. Christoffersen, J. Christoffersen and W. Kibalczyc, “Apparent Solubilities of Two 
Amorphous Calcium Phosphates and of Octacalcium Phosphate in the Temperature 
Range 30-42 C,” J. Cryst. Growth, 1990, 106, 349-354.  
46. P. C. H. Mitchell, S. F. Parker, K. Simkiss, J. Simmons and M. G Taylor, “Hydrated 
Sites in Biogenic Amorphous Calcium Phosphates: An Infrared, Raman, and Inelastic 
Neutron Scattering Study,” J. Inorg. Biochem., 1996, 62, 183-197. 
47. A. C. Tas, “Calcium Metal to Synthesize Amorphous or Cryptocrystalline Calcium 
Phosphates,” Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2012, 32, 1097-1106. 
48. E. Heyn, “Short Reports from the Metallurgical Laboratory of the Royal Mechanical and 
Testing Institute of Charlottenburg,” Metallographist, 1903, 5, 37-64. 
49. A. Oyane, K. Onuma, T. Kokubo and A. Ito, “Clustering of Calcium Phosphate in the 
System CaCl2-H3PO4-KCl-H2O,” J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8230-8235. 
108
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
One-Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Nanospheres of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate
50. E. D. Eanes, J. D. Termine and A. S. Posner, “Amorphous Calcium Phosphate in Skeletal 
Tissues,” Clin. Orthop. Relat. R., 1967, 53, 223-235. 
51. A. S. Posner and F. Betts, “Synthetic Amorphous Calcium Phosphate and Its Relation to 
Bone Mineral Structure,” Acc. Chem. Res., 1975, 8, 273-281. 
52. A. Pasinli, M. Yuksel, E. Celik, S. Sener and A. C. Tas, “A New Approach in 
Biomimetic Synthesis of Calcium Phosphate Coatings using Lactic Acid-Na Lactate 
buffered Body Fluid Solution,” Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 2282-2288. 
53. M. A. Miller, M. R. Kendall, M. K. Jain, P. R. Larson, A. S. Madden and A. C. Tas, 
”Testing of Brushite (CaHPO4 2H2O) in Synthetic Biomineralization Solutions and in 
situ Crystallization of Brushite Micro-Granules,” J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 2178-
2188. 
54. National 
Oceanic 
and 
Atmospheric 
Administration 
(NOAA); 
http://www.ospo.noaa.gov/Products/ocean/sst/contour/index.html 
55. B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts and P. Walter, Molecular Biology 
of The Cell, Garland Science, New York, 2002.  
56. X. Yin and M. J. Stott, “Biological Calcium Phosphates and Posner’s Cluster,” J. Chem. 
Phys., 2003, 118, 3717-3723.   
57. A. L. Boskey and A. S. Posner, “Magnesium Stabilization of Amorphous Calcium 
Phosphate: A Kinetic Study,” Mater. Res. Bull., 1974, 9, 907-916. 
58. S. V. Dorozhkin, E. I. Dorozhkina and M. Epple, “A Model System to Provide a Good in 
Vitro Simulation of Biological Mineralization,” Cryst. Growth Des., 2004, 4, 389-395.  
59. H. Zhou and S. Bhaduri, “Novel Microwave Synthesis of Amorphous Calcium 
Phosphate Nanospheres,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2012, 100B, 1142-1150. 
60. J. Sela, “Bone Remodeling in Pathologic Conditions: A Scanning Electron Microscopic 
Study,” Calcif. Tiss. Res., 1977, 23, 229-234. 
61. H. A. Lowenstam and S. Weiner, “Transformation of Amorphous Calcium Phosphate to 
Crystalline Dahllite in the Radular Teeth of Chitons,” Science, 1985, 227, 51-53. 
62. C. Holt and J. A. Carver, “Darwinian Transformation of a ‘Scarcely Nutritious Fluid’ 
into Milk,” J. Evol. Biol., 2012, 25, 1253-1263. 
63. J. A. Arnesen and A. Gildberg, “Preparation and Characterization of Gelatine from the 
Skin of Harp Seal (Phoca groendlandica),” Bioresource Technol., 2002, 82, 191-194. 
64. F. S. Robscheit-Robbins, L. L. Miller and G. H. Whipple, “Gelatin – Its Usefulness and 
Toxicity: Blood Protein Production Impaired by Continued Gelatin by Vein,” J. Exp. 
Med., 1944, 80, 145-164. 
65. M. Nahar, D. Mishra, V. Dubey and N. K. Jain, “Development, Characterization, and 
Toxicity Evaluation of Amphotericin B-loaded Gelatin Nanoparticles,” Nanomed-
Nanotechnol., 2008, 4, 252-261. 
66. L. Vroman, “Finding Seconds Count after Contact with Blood (and That is All I Did),” 
Colloid. Surface. B, 2008, 62, 1-4. 
Porous Ceramics
111
DETERMINATION OF ELASTIC MODULI FOR POROUS SOFC CATHODE FILMS 
USING NANOINDENTATION AND FEM 
 
Zhangwei Chen, Finn Giuliani, Alan Atkinson  
Materials Department, Imperial College London, SW6 7PG, UK 
 
ABSTRACT 
The aim of this work was to present the methodology for reliably determining the elastic 
moduli of partially sintered porous SOFC cathode films by appropriate nanoindentation 
experiments and analysis. The 3D microstructures of the porous crack-free perovskite LSCF 
films, which were prepared by sintering at 900-1200°C, were reconstructed based on dual-beam 
FIB/SEM tomography, followed by FEM to compute the elastic moduli. Detailed analysis of the 
nanoindentation results was also made to estimate the film-only elastic modulus for each film. 
The experiments showed that reliable measurements of the true film properties were obtained by 
data extrapolation provided that indentation depth was 0.1-0.2 of the film thickness. Effects from 
surface roughness and substrates responsible for the data deviation were taken into account. It 
was found that the elastic modulus increased from 32-122GPa as the sintering temperature raised 
from 900–1200°C and the porosity decreased from 47-15%. Further insights were gained into the 
porosity evolution, plastic deformation and substrate effect in the indented films with the aid of 
FIB/SEM. Excellent agreement was found when comparing the elastic moduli derived from 
nanoindentation and FEM, implying the present method could be an effective tool for 
investigating the way in which the mechanical properties of porous ceramic films is influenced 
by their microstructures. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are promising energy conversion devices which produce 
directly electricity from the electrochemical reactions of fuels and air (oxygen) with high 
efficiency and low environmental impact. A SOFC commonly consists of a dense ceramic 
electrolyte with high oxygen ionic conductivity, which is supported on either side by a porous 
mixed ionic-electronic conducting cathode and a porous anode, respectively. Perovskite-structure 
materials such as La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3ࡁͦ (LSCF) are often used as SOFC cathodes, particularly 
at intermediate operating temperatures1-4. 
Both the mechanical properties and electrochemical performance of an operating LSCF 
cathode are strongly linked to their three-dimensional (3D) microstructures, which include the 
spatial distribution of phases, surface area, porosity and tortuosity. These microstructures affect 
not only the overall electrode kinetics and thus the electrochemical reaction efficiency5, but also 
the mechanical properties (e.g. elastic modulus, fracture strength and fracture toughness), which 
influence the durability of SOFCs. Suitable mechanical properties can prevent failures such as 
cracks and fractures due to mechanical stresses arising from thermal expansion coefficient 
differences, temperature gradients, oxygen pressure gradients and external mechanical loading6,7. 
Such damage also results in the degradation of electrochemical performance. Moreover, as the 
cathode layer is joined together with the electrolyte layer, or interlayer, poor interfacial adhesion 
may induce delamination. Therefore, it is necessary to balance the trade-off between the 
electrochemical performance and the ability to withstand mechanical constraints. For example, 
larger porosities are favourable for enhancing the cathode’s electrochemical performance while 
its mechanical strength increases when the opposite is the case.  
To date, most of the studies on LSCF have concentrated on electrochemistry related 
properties4,8-11. There are only a handful of reports of their bulk mechanical properties, as 
summarised in Table I.   
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
112
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
Table I. Comparison of elastic modulus measurements for dense LSCF samples 
Reference 
Sintering 
Conditions 
(in air) 
Relative 
Density 
(%) 
Main 
Grain Size 
(μm) 
Measurement 
Technique 
Elastic 
Modulus at 
RT (GPa) 
Kimura 
et al.12 
1300°C/6h/106°C·h-1 
98 
5.0 
IET 
164 
Chou et 
al.13 
1250°C/4h/300°C·h-1 
95.4±0.2
2.9 
Ultrasonic 
method 
152±3 
Li et al.14 
1200°C/2h/300°C·h-1 
98.3 
0.8 
Nanoindentation 
(Berkovich tip, 
Pmax=490mN) 
155±4 
Huang 
et al.15 
1200°C/3h/300°C·h-1 
96.6±0.2
0.6 
Ring-on-ring 
bending test 
76±5 
 
Although nanoindentation technique, being capable of measuring mechanical properties 
of small volumes of material16,17, was used to characterise the elastic modulus of the bulk LSCF, 
most studies have implemented conventional testing methods, as shown in the table. However, 
none of these conventional techniques is applicable for porous thin films. Besides, the noticeable 
discrepancies of results imply a large uncertainty over the range of methods used. Nevertheless, 
the listed literature data are based on nominally dense bulk samples, which behave mechanically 
quite differently from the highly porous films used in most applications. Moreover, there is 
currently no study available on nanoindentation to characterise the micromechanical properties 
of partially sintered porous LSCF films. While indentation has been widely used for the 
determination of elastic properties of porous ceramic films18,19, polymeric coatings20-22 and 
highly porous bioceramic layers such as bones23-25, the methodology for extracting “long range” 
mechanical properties from indentation of porous films has not been properly established. No 
significant work has been conducted on partially sintered ceramic films or the correlation of 
mechanical properties to microstructural characteristics, as partially sintered ceramic films are 
not like the films studied in the above literature but often are brittle and feature a relatively rough 
surface and possess porosities of as large as 50 vol% with micrometre pores.    
On the other hand, limitations arise when using conventional 2D imaging techniques to 
characterise the microstructures of cathode materials because only the planar morphology can be 
revealed, which means that the microstructural features across the third dimension cannot be 
obtained or quantified. The development and application of advanced 3D tomographic 
techniques has made it possible to analyse the real spatial microstructures of SOFC electrodes by 
3D reconstruction26. One of the most widely used techniques is focused ion beam/scanning 
electron microscope (FIB/SEM) tomography, which was first applied to the characterisation of 
SOFC materials by Wilson et al.27 and has been implemented to reconstruct 3D microstructures 
of SOFC anodes thanks to its advanced slicing and imaging ability, and high spatial resolution. 
With the aid of the FIB/SEM technique, studies have been reported of the 3D reconstruction of 
LSCF cathode microstructures and the relationship to their electrochemical performance28-30.  
However, none of the above 3D reconstructions of LSCF cathodes was correlated with their 
mechanical properties.  
In response to the challenge, the current paper also aims to correlate the 3D 
microstructures from FIB/SEM sectioning, with the reliable elastic moduli estimated by spherical 
nanoindentation and analysis of the partially sintered porous LSCF cathode films of varying 
microstructures. The elastic moduli of the actual microstructures are then computed using finite 
element modeling (FEM), and compared with the measured ones. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
113
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
EXPERIMENTAL 
 
Sample Preparation 
Ce0.9Gd0.1O2-ͦ (CGO) powders (NexTech Materials, USA) were uniaxially pressed into 
substrate pellets, and then sintered at 1400°C in air with a heating rate of 5°C/min and holding 
time of 4 hours. A very fine surface polishing was performed on the pellets, successively using 
15, 9, 6, 4 and 1 micron diamond suspensions, in order to produce smooth and flat surfaces for 
ink deposition. LSCF ink (ESL, UK) was diluted 1:2 by volume with terpineol (Sigma, UK) and 
ball-milled to give a homogeneous slurry which was tape cast onto the CGO or LSCF pellet. The 
samples was dried overnight at 100°C and then sintered at 900 - 1200 °C in air for 4 hours 
(heating rate of 5°C/min) to produce crack-free films with a smooth surface suitable for 
nanoindentation.  
 
Nanoindentation 
The elastic moduli of the as-sintered porous LSCF cathode film samples were measured 
using a NanoTest nanoindentation platform (Micromaterials, UK) with a spherical diamond 
indenter tip of 50μm diameter. Compared with sharp indenters like Berkovich tips, benefits of 
using spherical tips include less sensitivity to surface condition31. At least 20 measurements were 
conducted in different locations for each sample in order to measure the variability of the 
mechanical response of the sample. Prior to nanoindentation tests, the NanoTest platform was 
precisely calibrated using a standard silica sample to establish the system frame compliance.  
According to the Oliver-Pharr method16, the elastic modulus E0 of the sample are given 
by the following equation based on the load (P) versus indentation depth (h) test curve: 
 
i
i
E
A
S
E
2
2
0
0
1
2
1
                                                           (1) 
 
where A is the projected contact area, S is the stiffness representing the slope of the 
initial unloading part of the curve, v is the Poisson’s ratio, and ͤ is a factor that depends on the 
indenter shape (ͤ = 1 here for a spherical indenter). The terms shown with subscript 0 and i are 
the properties of the test sample and indenter, respectively. A sensitivity study showed that the 
elastic modulus calculated from indentation depends little (e.g. variation < 8%) on the variation 
of Poisson’s ratio from 0.2-0.432. As a result, v0 = 0.31 of the fully dense LSCF material reported 
in13 was used in Equation (1) for all specimens. 
 
3D Microstructural Reconstruction 
An FIB/SEM dual beam instrument (Helios NanoLab 600i, FEI, USA) was used for the 
3D microstructural characterisation. The sintered LSCF film on the CGO substrate (LSCF/CGO 
pellet) was impregnated with epoxy resin under vacuum to enhance the grayscale contrast 
between pore phase and LSCF phase, and to improve the lateral resolution. The sample was then 
coated with a thin layer of gold to provide good electronic conductivity. A 2μm thick protective 
platinum layer was deposited on the surface of the cathode after the sample was put into the 
FIB/SEM vacuum chamber, in order to protect the microstructure and to prevent charging effect 
in the course of slicing and imaging. Prior to FIB slicing, it was necessary to machine a trench 
surrounding the three edges of the surface of interest in order to produce a peninsula-shaped 
114
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
volume of interest for sectioning.  A cross-shaped fiducial mark was then cut on one side of the 
volume of interest to allow positioning and distance check during working. Once the volume of 
interest was prepared and the sectioning parameters were defined, the serial cross-sectional 
milling by FIB and imaging of the resulting exposed surface by SEM was performed 
automatically by the instrument. The procedure is shown in detail in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Steps in the 3D microstructural reconstruction of the LSCF cathode using FIB/SEM. In 
b) and c), black (grayscale value=0) corresponds to pores, white corresponds to LSCF material; d) 
shows the 3D reconstructed microstructure and e) after meshing for FEM. 
 
In the current study, the working volume of the LSCF film was approximately 10×20×6 
μm, with SEM image pixel dimensions of 12.5nm and slice thickness of 12.5nm. The acquired 
images were then realigned along the direction of serial sectioning and segmented to distinguish 
solid material and pores using image processing software Avizo Fire 6.0 (VSG Co. USA). A 
smaller volume of ~3×3×3 μm, consisting of 240 serial 2D images, was selected from the initial 
volume for 3D reconstruction. This resulted in a 3D microstructural dataset with voxel sizes of 
12.5x12.5x12.5nm. The data was then processed using ScanIP 6.9 software (Simpleware, UK) to 
generate tetrahedral meshes for the solid phase, to be used in the finite element modelling (FEM).  
 
 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
115
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
Finite Element Modelling (FEM) 
FEM was performed using Abaqus CAE 6.10 (Dassault Systemes, USA) to calculate the 
effective elastic modulus of the meshed 3D microstructure. In the analysis, the elastic modulus of 
the fully dense LSCF pellet determined using nanoindentation and Poisson’s ratio of 0.31 from 13 
were used as the material property inputs of the solid content of the FE model. The analysis was 
run using the Abaqus Standard FE solver based on the assumption that the LSCF material was 
isotropic, linear and elastic. A small displacement was applied on one free surface normal to the 
Y direction so that the model deformed linearly along Y. The opposite face was constrained to 
have no displacement in this direction. Boundary conditions were also applied to constrain the 
degree of freedom of the normal displacement for the nodes on the model’s two adjacent 
surfaces parallel to Y. Such settings allowed the rest two surfaces to contract or extend freely 
once the displacement was applied. The resultant average force on the displaced surface was 
obtained from the model in order to calculate the effective elastic modulus of the 3D 
microstructure. The dimensionless Poisson’s ratio was calculated from the ratio of the transverse 
and longitudinal strains of the surfaces. 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Nanoindentation 
As mentioned earlier, nanoindentation measurements of porous films deposited on 
substrates are much more complicated than that of bulk samples due to more factors affecting the 
indentation behaviour. Surface roughness was inherent to the processing method of our films and 
could be less problematic due to the use of spherical tips and diluted ink. Crack-free films with 
macroscopically flat surface were fabricated as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. (a) Sintered LSCF film on CGO substrate pellet; SEM images of (b) cross-section of 
the sample and (c) the top surface of the film. 
 
However, there existed effects from substrate upon indentation approaching the 
film/substrate interface, which would be expected to affect the experimental data. Consequently 
the estimated elastic modulus of the sample could not be obtained straightforwardly from the 
nanoindentation data as the measured modulus varied with the indentation depth, but could only 
be obtained by removing those effects when applying extrapolation based on the test data.  
Figure 3 shows the nanoindentation data of elastic modulus as a function of maximum 
indentation depth relative to film thickness ratio (i.e. hmax/tf) of films after sintering at 900-
1200 °C. Further data analysis will be discussed afterwards. 
 
116
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
 
Figure 3. Elastic modulus vs. hmax/tf ratio for porous films after sintering at (a)-(d): 900-1200 °C 
 
The result indicates a clear dependence of measured elastic modulus on normalised 
indentation depth, which was largely controlled by the combined effects from surface roughness, 
densification and substrate.  
It can be seen from the result that, the scatter for shallow indent depths less than 10% of 
the film thickness is particularly large. This is due to the surface roughness. These shallow 
indentation depths are comparable to the grain size (270 nm) and the surface roughness (Ra > 
402 nm for 1000 °C sintered films) and result in variability in the initial stages on indentation. A 
cross section through a shallow indent is shown in Figure 4 together with the outline of the 
indenter tip where it contacts the surface. It can be seen that hmax in this case is of similar 
magnitude to the surface roughness and that the contact is at asperities on the specimen surface. 
The stresses at these points are much greater than for ideal contact between two smooth surfaces 
and the displacements are greater. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
Elastic modulus (GPa)
hmax/tf ratio (%)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
0
10
20
30
40
50
Elastic modulus (GPa)
hmax/tf ratio (%)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
0
10
20
30
40
50
Elastic modulus (GPa)
hmax/tf ratio (%)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
0
10
20
30
40
50
Elastic modulus (GPa)
hmax/tf ratio (%)
(a)
(d)
(c)
(b)
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
117
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
        
 
Figure 4. Effect of surface roughness on the real contact area with the indenter tip, leading to 
errors in indentation results. Here the sample shown was sintered at 1000 °C 
 
Due to the facts presented above, surface roughness might have two main effects on the 
measured results. One was the underestimation of E at shallow indentation depth, as shown in 
Figure 3. This underestimation was due to the overestimated contact area, provided that the 
indentation depth was comparable to the roughness, as also reported by other investigations 33,34. 
The measured E increased with the indentation depth as the surface roughness effect gradually 
diminished when an increasing number of the untouched valleys close to the asperities on the 
surface under compression were touched by the indenter tip. Such effect can be eliminated in 
data analysis by simply discarding the indentation depths smaller than a critical value, for which 
the result are less reliable, as suggested by Mencik and Swain35. Therefore, for the films studied 
in our case, indenting deeper than 10% of the film thickness was a prerequisite to generate 
reasonable values close to the film-only properties. Besides, surface roughness could also be 
responsible for the scatter in the measured data over the whole range of indentation depth as 
shown in Figure 3. Nevertheless, the standard deviations indicate that for the indentation depth in 
the range of 0.1-0.2tf, the elastic modulus data were more consistent and reproducible than that 
for the other depths. This was particularly true for films sintered at 900 and 1000 °C. While for 
the films sintered at 1100 and 1200 °C, the errors were much larger, which were attributed to the 
much coarser surface features after sintering at higher temperature. Nevertheless, no significant 
cracks were found in the indented region. Another observation which can be made from the SEM 
images is that the common pile-up and sink-in effects (as shown in Figure 5) of the film material 
affected by the substrate 36 are not found here.  
 
 
Figure 5. Schematic of half-space cross-sectional view of the effect of separated event of pile-up 
and sink-in on the actual contact area for nanoindentation on films with a spherical indenter 
118
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
Often the soft films deposited on hard substrates have the possibility to pile-up upon 
indentation due to the change of the films’ plastic deformation behaviour attributed to the 
constraint stress enforced by the relatively harder substrate, whereas in the opposite case the 
films tend to sink-in. As a result, the former case could erroneously increase the mechanical 
properties calculated using Oliver-Pharr method because according to the method E 
 A-1/2 
where A is extracted from nanoindentation load-depth data and not from direct measurement, 
while the piled-up material would accommodate an extra amount of load but causes 
underestimation of the real contact depth and hence the contact area. On the other hand, the sink-
in effect accounts for the overestimation of the real contact area and hence decrease of the 
calculated mechanical properties. Both of these cases would cause problems in the calculation 
using Oliver-Pharr method, which was first established for monolithic materials use only, as the 
calculated mechanical properties deviate from the true values. Therefore, in the absence of the 
pile-up and sink-in effects, the calculation in this study using Oliver-Pharr method could 
generate more accurate estimation towards the real mechanical properties of the film.  
In nanoindentation tests of thin films, one of the key difficulties is to avoid errors in 
measuring film properties caused by influence of the substrate. To do so, an appropriate 
indentation depth (hmax) and/or an indent load (Pmax) are desired by taking into account the test 
film’s thickness and the nature of the substrate (whether it has higher or lower elastic modulus 
than the film). Indenting to a depth less than 10% of the thickness of a film (namely hmax/tf < 0.1) 
has been empirically considered as a safe condition to avoid effects from substrate and extract 
intrinsic film properties in routine nanoindentation tests16. However, it can be found in our case 
that the effect from substrate was much less significant for indentation depth up to 0.2tf, as 
shown in Figure 3. Moreover, the influence of the substrate was not as marked for films sintered 
at 1100 and 1200 °C, as the plots stabilised as plateaus after indentation depth increased beyond 
0.2tf. This was most probably because the stiffness of these films was closer to that of the 
substrate. 
Figure 6 (a) shows the “plastic” zone (higher density caused by crushing deformation) 
under an indent performed at a relatively deep penetration (hmax/tf = 0.25) in a LSCF film after 
sintering at 1100 °C reaching as far as the interface with the substrate. Measurements of the local 
“density” using the method described earlier are presented in Figure 6 (b), which shows that the 
local density close to the substrate was 79.6%, greater than the density of the material away from 
the indent (74.4%). This indicates that the substrate was interfered with the progression of the 
“plastic” zone and, by inference, the elastic zone beyond. Therefore in this particular case the 
ratio hmax/tf = 0.25 was clearly too large for the results not to be influenced by the substrate and, 
since the substrate possessed a higher modulus (221 GPa) than the film, the measured film 
modulus E = 115 GPa is larger than the true value of approximately 90 GPa. To avoid the 
substrate effect, a lower penetration of around 0.15tf was applied as shown in Figure 7. In this 
case the “plastic” zone had less densification and did not reach the substrate. The modulus of 93 
GPa obtained is therefore significantly smaller.  
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
119
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
     
 
Figure 6. In an 1100 °C-sintered film: (a) cross-sectional SEM through a relatively deep indent; 
(b) variation of solid area ratio 
 
 
Figure 7. A shallower indent showing a less pronounced “plastic” zone that did not reach the 
substrate 
 
Further evidence of substrate effect can be observed as below. Figure 8 shows 
representative SEM images of the indentation imprints and their cross-sections at indentation 
depths from 800 to 3600 nm in an 1100 °C-sintered film (tf ࡉ 10 μm) obtained using the 
FIB/SEM instrument. The imprints for indentation depth lower than 800 nm (i.e. hmax/tf < 8%) 
could not be identified with SEM because the residual depths were too shallow. To simplify the 
image acquisition process, no surface protection coating or impregnation was applied to this 
sample. 
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
Area ratio of LSCF (%)
Distance from the indent bottom ( m)
undeformed region
deformed region
1
2
3
4
(a)
(b)
120
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
 
Figure 8. Top surface and cross-sectional SEM images of indents corresponding to maximum 
indentation depths from 800 to 3600 nm (i.e. 8% < hmax/tf < 36%) 
 
The results clearly show no delamination of the films from the substrates, indicating good 
interfacial adhesion. Increasing compaction of the film against the substrate can be found at large 
indentation depth. In this film a critical indentation depth of approximately 2000 nm (hmax/tf = 
20%) can be deduced above which the “plastic” deformation region reached the film/substrate 
interface and the substrate had a significant effect on the apparent modulus of the film.  
In the literature, most studies have adopted the approximate guideline of limiting the 
indentation depth to less than one tenth of the film thickness in order to obtain reliable values for 
the elastic modulus of the film16. In the present study we have shown that, for the materials 
investigated here, indentation depths up to 20% of film thickness could be used before the 
influence of the substrate became much prominent. 
It can be concluded from above analysis that indenting shallower than 0.1tf the results 
were unduly influenced by surface roughness and above 0.2tf they were increasingly influenced 
by the substrate. Therefore, the most reliable data points for the films to be extrapolated to 
estimate true properties in this study are those with the ratio hmax/tf in the range 0.1 to 0.2, where 
little influence from surface roughness and substrate were introduced. Consequently, 
extrapolations were carried out to zero hmax/tf by ignoring these most affected data range, as 
shown in Figure 3, particularly for the films sintered at lower temperatures (i.e. 900 and 
1000 °C). After all, it is always preferable to deduce elastic modulus values from a measured 
plateau rather than an overall fit. The estimated results were obtained as listed in Table II. 
 
 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
121
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
Table II. Estimated values of elastic modulus for LSCF films measured by nanoindentation 
Sintering temperature (°C) 
Elastic modulus (GPa) 
900 
32.4±1.2 
1000 
48.3±4.6 
1100 
90±6.4 
1200 
121.5±7.2 
 
It is evident to find from the table that the elastic modulus increased dramatically with 
sintering temperature as further densification took place at higher temperatures. For example, the 
elastic modulus rose nearly fourfold across the whole range of sintering temperatures. Figure 9 
further shows the measured elastic modulus as a function of porosity for the as-sintered films.  
 
 
Figure 9. Elastic modulus vs. porosity for as-sintered LSCF films 
 
The solid fit in Figure 9 suggests a fairly exponential relationship between modulus and 
porosity, confirming a major influence of porosity on modulus, although there might be some 
other factors to control the elastic modulus.  
 
3D Reconstruction and Finite Element Modelling 
At least three independent volumes of interest were sectioned for each film to perform the 
3D microstructure reconstruction and the subsequent FEM. The average total time consumed to 
complete the simulation was less than 10 minutes for each microstructure model, on a Dell 
PRECISION T5500 workstation with a Linux OS and an Intel Xeon quad-core 64 bit 2.76 GHz 
processor with 46 GB RAM. Some of the detailed data on the segmentation, meshing, and FEM 
processes are presented in Table III. Note that the varied thresholding values (which was set as 
the value of the valley between the two peaks in the grayscale histogram) for segmentation of 
different image stacks acquired are attributed to their respective grayscale distribution 
(brightness and contrast) caused by the image acquisition conditions of the time. From the table, 
it is also found that with the increasing sintering temperature (i.e. reducing porosity as shown 
earlier), the LSCF voxel number increased while the element number after meshing decreased 
and hence the total simulation time was also diminished. This was because lower porosity could 
y =235.46e0.041x
R²=0.993
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
40
50
Elastic modulus (GPa)
Porosity (%)
122
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
reduce the complexity of meshing by generating more regular mesh shape and adapting to larger 
mesh size. What  
 
Table III. Indicative data on the reconstruction and simulation of the films 
Sintering 
Temperature 
(°C) 
Thresholding 
Grayscale 
Value 
LSCF Voxel 
Number (106)
Mesh Element  
Number (106) 
Simulation 
Time Used 
(min) 
900 
40 
7.34 
2.15 
8.2 
1000 
70 
8.35 
2.09 
7.3 
1100 
35 
10.49 
1.86 
6.8 
1200 
75 
11.72 
1.75 
6.2 
 
The reconstructed 3D microstructures are shown in Figure 10 (a) - (d) in the order of 
increasing sintering temperature from 900 to 1200 °C. From these reconstructed microstructures, 
it can be readily observed that the gradual densification process took place with reducing 
porosity due to the increasing sintering temperature.   
 
 
Figure 10. Examples of the reconstructed 3D microstructures of the 900-1200 °C as-sintered 
LSCF films, with voids being pores 
 
Although assumptions of ideal material properties such as linear elasticity and isotropy 
were considered during simulations of the 3D reconstructed microstructures, the isotropy of the 
actual microstructures remained questioned. One of the factors responsible for the fact that the 
microstructures of the films could not possibly be ideally isotropic was that the films experienced 
constrained sintering which induced greater lateral shrinkage/densification across the direction 
normal to the surface than that in the other two directions which might result in non-identical 
X
Y
Z
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
123
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
physical and mechanical properties. Therefore, in our study we intended to understand the 
anisotropy of the films’ microstructures by comparing the possibly directionally dependent 
elastic moduli calculated by FEM based on the reconstructed 3D microstructures.    
Table IV shows the resulting elastic modulus in the three directions for the 
microstructures of films sintered at varying temperatures. Note that as explained earlier, Y 
direction which is normal to the film surface is the direction of nanoindentation. Therefore, E2 
would be used to compare with the elastic modulus resulted from nanoindentation. 
 
Table IV Effective elastic moduli calculated of actual reconstructed 3D models 
Sintering Temperature (°C) E in X (E1) (GPa)
E in Y (E2) (GPa) 
E in Z (E3) (GPa) 
900 
26.2±1.5 
36.2±1.2 
22.9±2.6 
1000 
50.1±3.2 
70.4±4.3 
57.2±1.8 
1100 
95.4±5.2 
109.1±6.4 
90.6±3.4 
1200 
114.3±6.1 
125.6±7.5 
111.8±4.6 
 
From the table, it can be seen that for all the samples the elastic modulus in the direction 
Y possessed a relatively larger value compared to that in the other two directions (i.e. X and Z), 
regardless the sintering temperature. This anisotropy is expected from the aforementioned 
constrained sintering during which grain boundary diffusion and surface diffusion along Y 
direction are inactivated due to the tensile stress in the film plane, while diffusion parallel to the 
film plane is active because there is no constraint in Y direction. As a result, atoms of the solid 
phase are diffused to fill the pore area parallel to the film plane, resulting in the contraction of 
the pores along X-Z directions and thus elongation normal to the film plane, although these 
differences can’t be readily distinguished in the 2D SEM image shown in the reconstructed 3D 
microstructures shown in Figure 10. The resulted necks of the overlapped grains perpendicular to 
the film plane are relatively bigger than those with other orientations, particularly in the initial 
stages of sintering or after sintering at lower temperatures. This is consistent with the observation 
found by Wang37 in the constrained sintering of YSZ films: the pores are preferentially oriented 
in the direction of normal to the film plane. Hence the modulus in direction Y is larger. 
Therefore, it would be very useful to determine the neck size and neck orientation as well as their 
effect on the mechanical properties of the films.  
In order to effectively assess the variation of the directionally dependent elastic modulus, 
the results were normalised relative to elastic modulus along Y direction, i.e. E* = Ei/E2 (i=1, 2 
and 3), as shown in Figure 11. The comparison and difference can be more readily seen with 
normalised average values added. The degree of anisotropy (DA) is thus be calculated and 
plotted for each sintering temperature: DA=1-smallest normalised modulus, with DA=0 when 
fully isotropic and DA=1, fully anisotropic. 
 
124
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
 
Figure 11. Normalised elastic modulus in three directions for the as-sintered films  
 
In Figure 11, it is evident that the relative error of the normalised average became 
increasingly smaller as the sintering temperature rose. Meanwhile, the elastic moduli in X and Z 
directions experienced similar increase and thus tended to gradually approach the modulus in Y 
direction with the rising sintering degree. Consequently, the degree of anisotropy decreases from 
about 0.4 to 0.1 with the increasing temperature of sintering from 900-1200 °C, attributable to a 
number of inter-related factors: (i) the elimination of pores by densification during sintering, (ii) 
the slowed grain boundary diffusion rate due to the longer grain boundary diffusion path 
generated by the increasing neck size, and (iii) the reduction of difference in neck size in 
different orientations due to surface diffusion.  
The comparison of nanoindentation result with the elastic modulus data derived from 
FEM is shown in Figure 12. In the figure, the elastic modulus variation was calculated by 
Ei,variation(i=x,y,z) = (Ei,max-Ei,min)/Ei,average. 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
900
1000
1100
1200
Degree of anisotropy
Normalised modulus (Ei/Ey)
Sintering temperature (°C)
X
Y
Z
Average
DA
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
125
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
 
Figure 12. Comparison of elastic moduli measured by nanoindentation and calculated by FEM 
 
As explained earlier, the values for X and Z directions in the film plane are very close to 
each other but smaller than that for Y (vertical direction), which were due to the constrained 
sintering mechanism. Although the samples exhibited varying degrees of anisotropy, the average 
values were considered to better represent the true elastic modulus values of the porous thin 
films. The decreasing elastic modulus variation with the increasing sintering temperature also 
shows diminishing sensitivity of the films’ isotropy on sintering degree. Furthermore, the figure 
indicates that the elastic modulus measured by nanoindentation for each sintering temperature 
was reasonably consistent with the average of the elastic moduli in the three directions within 
experimental errors, although slightly lower values derived from FEM than that from 
nanoindentation were found for films sintered at 1000 and 1100 °C sintered films. The 
experimental errors of the elastic moduli calculated by FEM are considered to be accounted by 
the porosity variation in different sampling locations. 
One may argue that the statistics was insufficiently convincible, but since the agreement 
was for all cases of the samples after sintering at varying four temperatures the results are 
reasonably representative even though the number of sampling locations per sample was 
relatively small. After all, the FEM calculation based on 3D reconstruction could be an effective 
means to evaluate the mechanical properties of the porous films, e.g. elastic modulus of the 
LSCF cathode in the current study.    
 
CONCLUSION 
Elastic moduli of porous partially sintered LSCF cathode films were measured using 
nanoindentation experiments and analysis. The 3D microstructures of the films was studied by 
3D reconstruction of serial sections obtained using a dual-beam FIB/SEM technique. Porosity 
and effective elastic modulus were calculated respectively using 3D quantification package and 
the finite element modelling based on the reconstructed microstructures. The experiments 
showed that reliable measurements of the true film properties were obtained by data 
extrapolation provided that indentation depth was 0.1-0.2 of the film thickness. Effects from 
surface roughness and substrates responsible for the data deviation were taken into account. It 
was found that the elastic modulus increased from 32-122GPa as the sintering temperature raised 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
900
1000
1100
1200
Elastic modulus variation (%)
Elastic modulus (GPa)
Sintering temperature (°C)
Nanoindentation
Direction X
Direction Y
Direction Z
Average value
E-modulus variation
126
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
from 900–1200°C and the porosity decreased from 47-15%. Despite the existence of certain 
degree of anisotropy in the microstructures, the average elastic moduli calculated by FEM were 
in good agreement to the experimental results measured by nanoindentation. The present method 
could be an effective tool for investigating the way in which the mechanical performance of 
electrodes is influenced by their microstructures. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was carried out as part of the UK Supergen consortium project on “Fuel 
Cells: Powering a Greener Future”. The Energy Programme is an RCUK cross-council initiative 
led by EPSRC and contributed to by ESRC, NERC, BBSRC and STFC. Z. Chen is especially 
grateful to the Chinese Government and Imperial College for financial support in the form of 
scholarships. Thanks are additionally due to Dr. Vineet Bhakhri for assistance with 
nanoindentation and Dr. Farid Tariq for help with simulation. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1 
Tai, L.-W. & al., e. Structure and electrical properties of La1-xSrxCo1-yFeyO3.Part 1. 
The system La0.8Sr0.2Co1-yFeyO3. Solid State Ionics 76, 259-271 (1995). 
2 
Anderson, H. U., Tai, L.-W., Chen, C. C. & Nasrallah, M. M. Review of the structural 
and electrical properties of the LaSrCoFeO3 system. Proceedings of the Fourth 
International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, 375-383 (1995). 
3 
Tai, L. W., et al. Structure and Electrical Properties of La1-xSrxCo1-yFeyO3. Part 2: The 
System La1-xSrxCo0.2Fe0.8O3. Solid State Ionics, 273-283 (1995). 
4 
Teraoka, Y., Zhang, H. M., Okamoto, K. & Yamazoe, N. Mixed ionic-electronic 
conductivity of La1-xSrxCo1-yFeyO3-  perovskite-type oxides. Materials Research 
Bulletin 23, 51-58, doi:Doi: 10.1016/0025-5408(88)90224-3 (1988). 
5 
Adler, S. B. Electrode Kinetics of Porous Mixed-Conducting Oxygen Electrodes. J. 
Electrochem. Soc. 143, 3554-3564 (1996). 
6 
Bellon, O., Sammes, N. M. & Staniforth, J. Mechanical properties and electrochemical 
characterisation of extruded doped cerium oxide for use as an electrolyte for solid oxide 
fuel cells. Journal of Power Sources 75, 116-121, doi:10.1016/s0378-7753(98)00104-9 
(1998). 
7 
Atkinson, A. & Selcuk, A. Mechanical behaviour of ceramic oxygen ion-
conductingmembranes. Solid State Ionics 134, 59-66 (2000). 
8 
Schlehuber, D., Wessel, E., Singheiser, L. & Markus, T. in Diffusion in Materials - 
Dimat2008 Vol. 289-292 Defect and Diffusion Forum Series (eds A. Aguero et al.)  551-
554 (Trans Tech Publications Ltd, 2009). 
9 
Carter, S. et al. Oxygen transport in selected nonstoichiometric perovskite-structure 
oxides. Solid State Ionics 53-56, 597-605, doi:Doi: 10.1016/0167-2738(92)90435-r 
(1992). 
10 
Ishigaki, T., Yamauchi, S., Kishio, K., Mizusaki, J. & Fueki, K. Diffusion of oxide ion 
vacancies in perovskite-type oxides. Journal of Solid State Chemistry 73, 179-187, 
doi:Doi: 10.1016/0022-4596(88)90067-9 (1988). 
11 
Stevenson, J. W., Armstrong, T. R., Carneim, R. D., Pederson, L. R. & Weber, W. J. 
Electrochemical Properties of Mixed Conducting Perovskites La1-xMxCo1-yFeyO3-  
(M = Sr, Ba, Ca). Journal of The Electrochemical Society 143, 2722-2729, 
doi:10.1149/1.1837098 (1996). 
12 
Kimura, Y., Kushi, T., Hashimoto, S.-i., Amezawa, K. & Kawada, T. Influences of 
Temperature 
and 
Oxygen 
Partial 
Pressure 
on 
Mechanical 
Properties 
of 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
127
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
La0.6Sr0.4Co1 yFeyO3
. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 95, 2608-2613, 
doi:10.1111/j.1551-2916.2012.05265.x (2012). 
13 
Chou, Y.-S., Stevenson, J. W., TArmstrong, T. R. & LPederson, L. R. Mechanical 
Properties of La1-xSrxCo0.2Fe0.8O3-  Mixed-Conducting Perovskites Made by the 
Combustion Synthesis Technique. Journal of American Ceramic Society 83, 1457-1464 
(2000). 
14 
Li, 
N., 
Verma, 
A., 
Singh, 
P. 
& 
Kim, 
J.-H. 
Characterization 
of 
La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3
–Ce0.8Gd0.2O2 
composite 
cathode 
for 
intermediate 
temperature 
solid 
oxide 
fuel 
cells. 
Ceramics 
International 
39, 
529-538, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2012.06.059 (2013). 
15 
Huang, B., Chanda, A., Steinbrech, R. & Malzbender, J. Indentation strength method to 
determine 
the 
fracture 
toughness 
of 
La0.58Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3-delta 
and 
Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3-delta. 
Journal 
of 
Materials 
Science 
47, 
2695-2699, 
doi:10.1007/s10853-011-6095-2 (2012). 
16 
Oliver, W. C. & Pharr, G. M. An improved technique for determining hardness and 
elastic modulus using load and displacement sensing indentation experiments. Journal of 
Materials Research 7, 1564-1583 (1992). 
17 
Oliver, W. C. Measurement of hardness and elastic modulus by instrumented indentation: 
Advances in understanding and refinements to methodology. Journal of Materials 
Research 19, 3 (2004). 
18 
Huang, X. & Pelegri, A. A. Nanoindentation Measurements on Low-k Porous Silica Thin 
Films Spin Coated on Silicon Substrates. Journal of Engineering Materials and 
Technology 125, 361-367 (2003). 
19 
Alcala, J., Gaudette, F., Suresh, S. & Sampath, S. Instrumented spherical micro-
indentation of plasma-sprayed coatings. Materials Science and Engineering: A 316, 1-10 
(2001). 
20 
Vella, J., Adhihetty, I., Junker, K. & Volinsky, A. Mechanical properties and fracture 
toughness of organo-silicate glass (OSG) low-k dielectric thin films for microelectronic 
applications. International journal of fracture 120, 487-499 (2003). 
21 
Volinsky, A. A., Vella, J. B. & Gerberich, W. W. Fracture toughness, adhesion and 
mechanical properties of low-k dielectric thin films measured by nanoindentation. Thin
Solid Films 429, 201-210 (2003). 
22 
Shen, L. & Zeng, K. Comparison of mechanical properties of porous and non-porous 
low-k 
dielectric 
films. 
Microelectronic 
Engineering 
71, 
221-228, 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2003.11.006 (2004). 
23 
Rho, J.-Y., Tsui, T. Y. & Pharr, G. M. Elastic properties of human cortical and trabecular 
lamellar 
bone 
measured 
by 
nanoindentation. 
Biomaterials 
18, 
1325-1330, 
doi:10.1016/s0142-9612(97)00073-2 (1997). 
24 
Turner, C. H. The elastic properties of trabecular and cortical bone tissues aresimilar 
result from two microscopic measurement techniques.pdf. Journal of Biomechanics 32, 
437-441 (1999). 
25 
Zysset, P. K., Edward Guo, X., Edward Hoffler, C., Moore, K. E. & Goldstein, S. A. 
Elastic modulus and hardness of cortical and trabecular bone lamellae measured by 
nanoindentation in the human femur. Journal of Biomechanics 32, 1005-1012, 
doi:10.1016/s0021-9290(99)00111-6 (1999). 
26 
Shearing, P. R., Brett, D. J. L. & Brandon, N. P. Towards intelligent engineering of 
SOFC electrodes: a review of advanced microstructural characterisation techniques. 
International Materials Reviews 55, 347-363, doi:10.1179/095066010x12777205875679 
(2010). 
128
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Determination of Elastic Moduli for Porous SOFC Cathode Films
27 
Wilson, J. R. et al. Three-dimensional reconstruction of a solid-oxide fuel-cell anode. 
Nature Materials 5, 541-544, doi:10.1038/nmat1668 (2006). 
28 
Gostovic, D., Smith, J. R., Kundinger, D. P., Jones, K. S. & Wachsman, E. D. Three-
Dimensional Reconstruction of Porous LSCF Cathodes. Electrochemical and Solid-State 
Letters 10, B214, doi:10.1149/1.2794672 (2007). 
29 
Joos, J., Carraro, T., Weber, A. & Ivers-Tiffée, E. Reconstruction of porous electrodes by 
FIB/SEM for detailed microstructure modeling. Journal of Power Sources, 
doi:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.10.006 (2010). 
30 
Matsuzaki, K., Shikazono, N. & Kasagi, N. Three-dimensional numerical analysis of 
mixed ionic and electronic conducting cathode reconstructed by focused ion beam 
scanning electron microscope. Journal of Power Sources 196, 3073-3082, 
doi:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.11.142 (2011). 
31 
Swain, M. V. & Men ík, J. Mechanical property characterization of thin films using 
spherical tipped indenters. Thin Solid Films 253, 204-211, doi:10.1016/0040-
6090(94)90321-2 (1994). 
32 
Mesarovic, S. D. & Fleck, N. A. Spherical indentation of elastic–plastic solids. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Sciences 455, 2707-2728, doi:10.1098/rspa.1999.0423 (1999). 
33 
Rico, A., Garrido, M. A., Otero, E. & Rodriguez, J. Roughness Effect on the Mechanical 
Properties of Ceramic Materials Measured from Nanoindentation Tests. Key Engineering 
Materials 333, 247-250 (2007). 
34 
Walter, C. & Mitterer, C. 3D versus 2D finite element simulation of the effect of surface 
roughness on nanoindentation of hard coatings. Surface and Coatings Technology 203, 
3286-3290 (2009). 
35 
Mencik, J. & Swain, M. Errors associated with depth-sensing microindentation tests. 
Journal of Materials Research 10, 1491-1501 (1995). 
36 
Tsui, T. Y., Vlassak, J. & Nix, W. D. Indentation plastic displacement field: Part I. The 
case of soft films on hard substrates. Journal of Materials Research 14, 2196-2203, 
doi:doi:10.1557/JMR.1999.0295 (1999). 
37 
Wang, X. & Atkinson, A. Microstructure evolution in thin zirconia films: Experimental 
observation and modelling. Acta Materialia 59, 2514-2525 (2011). 
 
 
129
MECHANICAL MODELING OF MICROCRACKED POROUS CERAMICS 
 
Ray S. Fertig IIIa and Seth Nickersonb 
aDept. of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA 
bCorning Incorporated, Corning, NY, USA & Bauhaus University, Weimar, Germany 
 
ABSTRACT 
The focus of this work is to develop an approach for predicting microcracking in porous 
ceramics with anisotropic crystalline thermal properties, such as cordierite, arising from 
combined thermal and mechanical loading. A previous model for predicting thermally-induced 
microcracking based on the distribution of grain boundary tractions is expanded upon to predict 
the increase in grain boundary microcracks with increasing applied tensile load. A method for 
linking isotropic distributions of thermally-induced microcracks with uniaxial tensile load-
induced anisotropic distributions of microcracks is proposed. The developed model contains only 
a single additional parameter beyond the thermal model, which characterizes load transfer from 
the macroscopic structure to grain boundary tractions.  The model is used to predict microcrack-
controlled nonlinear constitutive tensile behavior of a microcracked porous ceramic at a wide 
range of temperatures. 
 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
Porous ceramics used in environmental control technologies such as catalytic converters 
and diesel particulate filters are often subjected to very large changes in operating temperature 
and high thermal gradients. Typically refractory ceramics, such as cordierite, are used in these 
applications to mitigate the effects of thermal shock. One feature of these materials is that their 
microstructure changes continuously through the formation and healing of microcracks 
throughout the thermomechanical loading process. The effects of these microcracks on the 
constitutive behavior of the ceramics are complicated; not only is the density of cracks 
important, but the effect of friction on existing cracks can play a significant role in the 
constitutive response. The focus of the work reported here is to develop a model with parameters 
corresponding to meaningful microstructure features, which enable predicting microcrack 
evolution under combined thermal and mechanical loading. This microcrack information is then 
used to predict the constitutive response of a porous ceramic to tensile loading. 
 
MODEL DEVELOPMENT 
The fundamental hypothesis for the model is that grain boundary quantities such as 
traction, traction ratio, and crack opening displacement can be represented as statistical 
distributions. Simple relationships can then be developed between these distributions and 
macroscopic quantities such as stress and temperature. The result of this approach will be a 
multiscale model with physically meaningful parameters. Although the microstructure of the 
porous ceramics under consideration is very complex, the features of the microstructure 
contribute to a statistical distribution of the microstructure if a sufficient quantity of material is 
considered. For example, the starting point for the model development is the distribution of grain 
boundary tractions in uncracked boundaries, as shown in Figure 1. Under changing temperature, 
this distribution spreads out—its standard deviation increases and the mean remains at zero net 
stress (static equilibrium) 1. Under applied tensile load this distribution shifts to represent an 
externally applied load. The distribution contains a single critical, threshold microstructural 
feature—the grain boundary strength. The constructed model only requires the relationship 
between macroscopic temperature or stress to the spreading or the shifting, respectively, to 
complete a multiscale model that predicts the effects of temperature or stress on cracking. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
130
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
 
Figure 1. (Left) Effect of temperature on boundary traction distribution. (Right) Effect of loading 
on boundary traction distribution. 
 
Linking Crack Concentrations to Modulus 
The link between idealized microcracks and modulus has been established by multiple 
researchers 2,3. For isotropically distributed penny-shaped microcracks, Hasselman and Singh 3 
showed that the functional form for the relationship between isotropic crack density n, elastic 
modulus E of the microcracked material, and the uncracked modulus 
0
E  is 
 
 
0
1
1
E
n
E
.  
(1) 
 
where  is a microstructure-dependent constant. For anisotropic cracks perpendicular to the 
loading direction, they showed the relationship to the modulus in the tensile direction Et was 
given by 
 
 
0
1
1
t
t
tn
E
E
  
(2) 
 
where 
tn  is the density of perpendicular cracks and 
t  is again a microstructure-dependent 
constant. Importantly, they showed that  
 
 
3
t
.  
(3) 
 
Upon initial loading of an externally applied macroscopic stress (at some fixed 
temperature T) we require the modulus for isotropic cracking to be equal to the modulus for 
anisotropic cracking. This is accomplished by setting Equations (1) and (2) equal to each other 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
131
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
and invoking Equation (3) to get that the relationship between isotropic crack density n and the 
crack density that responds to a tensile load 
tn  is given by 
 
 
0
3
t
n T
n
.  
(4) 
 
Equation (4) provides a critical link between thermally-induced microcracks and tensile 
loading-induced microcracks. 
    
Thermally-Induced Microcracking 
Previously the authors proposed a model for thermally-induced microcracks 1. This 
model is refined and adapted for integration with the constitutive model proposed in a 
subsequent section. The premise of this model is that temperature change from some stress-free 
temperature causes the standard deviation of the grain boundary tractions to change, but the 
mean remains unchanged. The relationship between the standard deviation of the distribution and 
the temperature below the stress free temperature is assumed to be linear such that 
  
 
*
1
ˆ
T
C
  
(5) 
 
where C1 is a constant of proportionality, 
 
 
*
0
T
T
T ,  
(6) 
 
and 
0T is the stress-free temperature. Additionally, the fraction of grain boundaries that have 
cracked is assumed to be proportional to the fraction of available grain boundaries with stresses 
larger than some critical grain boundary strength S. 
 
The model predicts the relationship between the fraction of grain boundaries that have 
cracked n and the temperature T 
 
 
2
2
*
*
*
1
exp
dn
n
dT
T
T
  
(7) 
 
 
1 2
S
C
  
(8) 
 
Solving Equation (1) subject to the initial condition 
 
 
0
0
n
  
(9) 
 
yields 
 
 
*
*
1
1 exp
1 erf
2
n T
T
.  
(10) 
132
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
A single experimentally obtained cooling curve of the elastic modulus, such as the one shown in 
Figure 2 (circular markers), can be used in conjunction with Equations (1) and (10) can be used 
to find the appropriate values of  an  for a particular porous ceramic system. The modulus 
predicted by Equation (10) is shown by the solid curve in Figure 2. Thus, the agreement between 
model and experiment is very good for this material. 
 
Figure 2. Modulus evolution due to thermal microcracking during cooling 
Tensile Loading-Induced Microcracking 
Equation (7) describes the evolution of normalized isotropic microcrack density during 
cooling; because the material is assumed to be randomly oriented no crack density anisotropy 
was assumed to occur. However, during tensile loading the additional cracking will be 
anisotropic, with crack perpendicularly to the loading increasing. Tensile cracks and thermal 
cracks are related using Equation (4). 
 
As was done to develop the model for thermally-induced microcracks, the increase in 
tensile cracks is assumed to be proportional to the number of available uncracked boundaries and 
the fraction of those boundaries that cross a critical stress “S” during some increment of applied 
stress. This is written in differential form as 
 
 
1
t
t
app
app
dC S
dn
n
d
d
,  
(11) 
 
where C  is the complementary cumulative distribution function of the boundary traction and 
app  is the applied stress. For the purposes of this analysis a normal stress distribution is assumed 
such that 
 
 
ˆ
1 1 erf
2
2
S
C S
  
(12) 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
133
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
where 
 is the mean boundary traction. Substituting Equation (5) into Equation (12) and using 
the definition given by Equation (8) allows the derivative to be computed such that Equation (11) 
becomes 
 
 
2
*
*
*
1
1
exp
t
t
app
app
d
dn
n
d
ST
d
T
ST
  
(13) 
 
As cracking proceeds the load is carried by a smaller area. Additionally, even in an uncracked 
state, the load carried by boundaries is magnified due to porosity in the material. The relationship 
between porosity P and mean boundary traction is not simple, as it will depend on the 
morphology of the pores. Thus, 
will depend on porosity and crack density in the form 
 
 
1
app
P
t
C
n   
(14) 
 
where 
P
C  is a stress concentration coefficient dependent on porosity and pore morphology that 
will always exceed unity. One such simple inverse relationship between 
P
C  and P is assumed 
such that 
  
 
1
1
P
C
P .  
(15) 
 
Substituting Equation (14) into Equation (13) gives 
 
 
2
2
*
*
1
exp
1
1
app
t
P
P
app
t
dn
C
d
S T
T
S
C
n
.  
(16) 
 
Equation (16) reveals the simplicity of this model. Only two quantities are needed to describe 
microcrack evolution: 
P
C
S  and 
*
T . And all coefficients are physically meaningful and coupled 
with thermally-induced microcracking. 
 
Tensile Unloading and Crack Closure 
Thus far, the proposed model predicts the effects of thermomechanical microcracking at 
grain boundaries during loading. To complete the model two additional features of the material 
must be accounted for: crack closure during unloading and friction at grain boundaries in closed 
cracks. This section details the development of a model to address crack closure. The authors 
previous study suggested that the distribution of crack opening displacement (COD)  in 
microcracked bodies is reasonably well described by an exponential distribution 1 with a 
probability density function and cumulative distribution function given by 
 
 
exp
f
  
(17) 
134
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
and 
 
 
1 exp
F
,  
(18) 
 
respectively, where  is related to the mean COD 
  by 
 
 
1.  
(19) 
 
An example of this distribution is shown in Figure 3 
 
 
Figure 3. Crack opening displacement distribution. 
During unloading 
 is assumed to be linearly related to the applied stress such that 
 
 
*
0
0
0
,
app
T
  
(20) 
 
where
0 is the stress at which unloading initiates,  is a constant of proportionality, and 
0 is the 
mean COD at the initiation of unloading due to thermal cracking to 
*
T and loading to 
0 . 
Substituting Equations (19) into Equation (18) gives 
 
 
0
0
1 exp
app
F
.  
(21) 
 
The hypothesis for this work is that cracks can be considered as closed when their COD is less 
than some critical value 
c , which should be related to the surface roughness of the crack face. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
135
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
The density of closed cracks can then be written as a function of the density of tensile cracks and 
the critical COD 
 
 
0
0
1 exp
c
cl
t
c
t
app
n
n F
n
.  
(22) 
 
Dividing by the critical COD, Equation (22) can then be written as a function of two parameters 
 
 
0
0
1
1 exp
cl
t
c
t
app
c
c
n
n F
n
.  
(23) 
 
Effect of Friction 
Frictional sliding becomes an important phenomenon when cracks close and likely 
contributes to the macroscopic constitutive behavior of the porous material. For the sake of 
simplicity, a Coulomb friction law is assumed such that slip occurs when 
 
 
S
N
  
(24) 
 
where 
S  and 
N are the shear and normal tractions, respectively, along the closed crack 
boundaries, and  is the coefficient of static friction. The distributions of the boundary tractions 
would be very difficult to accurately quantify, and quantification of the ratio of shear to normal 
stresses from these distributions would be intractable. In this work, rather than attempt to assume 
two distributions and their correlation, a distribution of the ratio of shear to normal tractions is 
proposed. Again, for the sake of simplicity a normal distribution is assumed. In reality the 
distribution must be bounded by ± ; to approximate this with a normal distribution, the 
maximum standard deviation for this distribution is set at /3. This hypothetical distribution with 
maximum standard deviation is show in Figure 4 (solid). 
 
136
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
 
Figure 4. Variation of the friction stress ratio distribution during loading and unloading. 
It is postulated that tensile loading causes a shift of this distribution and that the fraction 
that cross the value of  are then able to actively participate in reducing the effective modulus of 
the material. This shift is assumed to be linearly proportional to the applied stress 
 
 
S
P
app
N
C
,  
(25) 
 
where  is a constant of proportionality dependent on the morphology of the porous material. 
Upon initial loading, a small number of cracks begin to slide, represented by the dotted curve in 
Figure 4. Upon further unloading all of the sliding cracks stop sliding (represented by the dashed 
curve in Figure 4) and result in an instantaneous increase in the observed tangent modulus of the 
material. 
That both open and closed cracks contribute to modulus reduction suggests that an active 
crack density 
ac
n  should be defined that describes the density of cracks participating in modulus 
reduction. The most transparent approach to define this is to use the cumulative distribution 
function M of the distribution described in Figure 4 to determine the fraction of the closed cracks 
that are contributing to modulus reduction. 
 
 
0
(loading)
0
(un
1
,
lo
,
 
adi g
 
n )
ac
t
cl
app
ac
t
cl
app
n
n
n
M
d
n
n
n M
d
  
(26) 
 
where 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
137
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
 
1
1
1
erf
1
erf
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
S
P
app
N
C
R
R
M
  
(27) 
 
and ˆR is the standard deviation of the ratio of shear to normal tractions. The density of closed 
cracks is assumed to be constant on loading and the density of tensile-induced cracks is assumed 
to be constant upon unloading. Substituting Equation (27) into Equation (26) yields 
 
 
0
(loading)
ˆ
0
(unloading)
ˆ
1 erf
,
2
2
1 erf
,
2
2
P
app
cl
ac
t
app
P
app
cl
ac
t
app
C
n
n
n
d
C
n
n
n
R
d
R
  
(28) 
 
Using Equation (28) to describe the microcrack density, the incremental modulus of the material 
is computed using Equation (2), where 
ac
n  is substituted for . The modulus E computed is then 
treated as a tangent modulus for the material because frictional effects are history-dependent and 
act over a particular load increment. Thus, the constitutive behavior was computed using 
 
 
app
t
d
t
E t
d
  
(29) 
  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
To test the results of the model developed here, results are compared with room 
temperature tensile loading data for a porous cordierite. The modulus-temperature behavior for 
this ceramic is shown in Figure 2. From this data, values for  and  were computed. The 
coefficient of friction for this material is not known, but reported values for ceramics range from 
0.6 - 1.8 4-6. For this work, a nominal value of  = 1.0 was selected. The other needed parameters 
of interest are given in Table 1 along with the method used for determining their values. 
 
Table 1. Model parameters. 
Parameter 
Value 
Method of Computation 
2013 K 
Calibrated from Figure 2 
78.6 
Calibrated from Figure 2 
CP 
1.75 
Equation (15) 
1.0 
Literature value 
0.25 
MPa-1 
Selected as a best fit to experimental data 
S 
700 
MPa 
Estimate from previous work 1 
0
c
 
0.01 
Solution is insensitive to values less than this 
c  
24.9 
MPa-1 
Computed assuming 40% of cracks close upon unloading to zero. For a 
range of 40% to 90% of cracks closing on unloading, this value is nearly 
constant. If less than 40% of cracks close after unloading, this value 
cannot be computed. 
138
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
Using the parameters given in Table 1, the model was used to compute the tensile 
loading-unloading curve for a sample loaded to 4 MPa. Figure 5 shows the predicted response 
along with the experimental loading data. Three features of these results are notable. First, 
excellent agreement is observed on loading. Second, a reasonable loading-unloading hysteresis 
was predicted. (Because unloading data for this sample was not available, validation of 
unloading was unable to be made.) Finally, the only “fitted” parameter to this data was . The 
other parameters were either measured directly or given reasonable physical values. 
 
 
Figure 5. Constitutive behavior under tensile loading and unloading. 
 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
In this work, a model was developed for predicting microcrack density evolution in 
porous ceramics in response to combined thermal and mechanical loading. The microcrack 
density was used to predict effective elastic modulus and constitutive response of the 
microcracked material. The driving paradigm for this model was the representation of grain 
boundary quantities such as traction, traction ratio, and crack opening displacement as statistical 
distributions. Simple relationship were developed between these distributions and macroscopic 
quantities such as stress and temperature. This enabled a multiscale model to be developed with 
physically meaningful parameters. Our preliminary results showed good agreement with 
experiment. Further studies are underway to validate this model. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Financial support from Corning Incorporated is gratefully acknowledged. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
139
Mechanical Modeling of Microcracked Porous Ceramics
1 
Fertig III, R. S. & Nickerson, S. in 37th International Conference and Expo on Advanced 
Ceramics and Composites. 
2 
Walsh, J. B. The effect of cracks on the uniaxial elastic compression of rocks. Journal of 
Geophysical Research 70, 399-411, doi:10.1029/JZ070i002p00399 (1965). 
3 
Hasselman, D. P. H. & Singh, J. P. Analysis of Thermal Stress Resistance of 
Microcracked Brittle Ceramics. Ceramic Bulletin 58, 856-860 (1979). 
4 
Bennison, S. J. & Lawn, B. R. Role of interfacial grain-bridging sliding friction in the 
crack-resistance and strength properties of nontransforming ceramics. Acta Metallurgica 
37, 2659-2671, doi:10.1016/0001-6160(89)90299-x (1989). 
5 
Hatzor, Y. H., Zur, A. & Mimran, Y. Microstructure effects on microcracking and brittle 
failure of dolomites. Tectonophysics 281, 141-161, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0040-
1951(97)00073-5 (1997). 
6 
David, E. C., Brantut, N., Schubnel, A. & Zimmerman, R. W. Sliding crack model for 
nonlinearity and hysteresis in the uniaxial stress-strain curve of rock. Interational Journal 
of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 52, 9-17 (2012). 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
141
 
 
SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF AEROGEL GLASS MATERIALS FOR 
WINDOW GLAZING APPLICATIONS 
 
Tao Gaoa, Bjørn Petter Jelleb,c, Arild Gustavsena, and Jianying Hed 
a Department of Architectural Design, History and Technology, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU), NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway. 
b Department of Materials and Structures, SINTEF Building and Infrastructure, NO-7465 
Trondheim, Norway.  
c Department of Civil and Transport Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology (NTNU), NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway. 
d Department of Structural Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
(NTNU), NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway.  
 
ABSTRACT  
Sol-gel derived aerogel glass materials have been prepared by sintering an acid-catalyzed 
silica aerogel precursor. The physical and chemical processes during the sol 
 gel 
 glass 
transformation have been discussed. The obtained aerogel glass materials are characterized by 
low mass density (   1.8 g/cm3), low thermal conductivity (k  0.17 W/(mK)), high visible 
transparency (Tvis  95.4% at 500 nm), and improved mechanical strength (reduced modulus Er  
6.42 GPa). Strategies that enable to enhance further the mechanical strength and minimize the 
manufacturing costs of aerogel glass materials are also described.  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Silica aerogels are an extremely porous (porosity 80–99.8%), low-density (~0.003–
0.5 g/cm3), and low-thermal conductivity (~0.005–0.1 W/(mK)) solid material with many 
important applications.1 In building and construction sector, for example, silica aerogels have 
already been used as a promising thermal insulation material.2 Silica aerogels have also found 
applications as lightweight aggregates for concrete and cement-based materials.3,4 The fact that 
silica aerogels can be made in large pieces (i.e. monolithic panes) while maintaining a 
transparent state makes silica aerogels an attractive glazing material for superinsulating 
windows.5,6 In fact, the great potential of silica aerogels in the building and construction sector 
have resulted in renewed interest in the production and optimization of silica aerogels with 
improved performance and reduced manufacturing costs.1  
We are interested in high performance windows that are known to be critical to improve the 
energy efficiency of buildings.7-9 As an interesting window innovation, highly insulating aerogel 
glazing units with U-values (U-value is an overall heat transfer co-efficient and is frequently 
used in building and construction sector. A low U-value indicates a high level of thermal 
insulation) of about 0.5–0.7 W/(m2K) have been reported in the literature.5,6,8 An aerogel glazing 
unit is architecturally similar to the standard double glazing, where the air gap between two glass 
panes is filled with silica aerogels, usually in form of granules.10 It is worth noting that, however, 
the loss of visible transparency remains an obvious drawback for aerogel granule glazings. Better 
performance with respect to high visible transparency is usually achieved with monolithic 
aerogel panes.5,6,10 However, monolithic aerogel panes are very brittle, i.e., having typically a 
flexural strength varying between 1 kPa and 1 MPa,11 which makes their application as window 
glazing materials questionable, e.g. the risk of failure under tensile/bending stresses due to wind 
load and/or external mechanical forces. Improving the mechanical strength of silica aerogels, 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
142
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
especially for the monolithic panes, has without doubts been an important research topic in the 
field.12  
Enhanced mechanical performance of silica aerogels can be achieved via different structural 
reinforcements, for example, by using flexible silica precursors in silica gel backbone,13 
conformal coating of silica backbone via surface cross-linking with polymers,14,15 and dispersing 
reinforced fibers in the initial sol of silica aerogels.16 It is worth noting that many of these 
mechanical reinforcing strategies fail to produce strong silica aerogels with a transparent state, 
which is, however, a critical requirement for their potential application as glazing materials. 
We report in this work an approach to enhance the mechanical strength of silica aerogels via 
densification. Although the loss of porosity and consequently the increase of thermal 
conductivity of silica aerogels represent drawbacks related to the densification process,17,18 a 
combination of enhanced mechanical performance and optical transparency indicates that the 
densificated silica aerogels may be used as new glass material for window glazing application. 
Preliminary experimental results indicate lightweight (density  
 1.8 g/cm3, compared to 
2.5 g/cm3 for float glass) and thermal insulating (thermal conductivity k 
 0.18 W/(mK), 
compared to about 0.92 W/(mK) for float glass) aerogel glass materials with high visible 
transparency (Tvis  95.4% at 500 nm, compared to 92.0% for float glass) can be achieved by 
annealing an acid-catalyzed silica aerogel precursor at 700°C. Typical elastic modulus Er of the 
obtained aerogel glass materials is about 6.42 GPa, which can be further enhanced by, e.g. 
increasing the annealing temperatures.18  
 
EXPERIMENTAL 
 
Materials and Chemicals 
Reagent-grade tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), ethanol (EtOH, 96%), nitric acid (HNO3, 
68%), sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 98%), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 30%) were purchased from 
Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Float glass substrates (25 mm × 25 mm × 
1 mm) were cleaned with a Piranha solution (98% H2SO4/30% H2O2, 7/3 in volume ratio), 
washed with distilled water, and dried naturally in air for further use. Distilled water was used 
throughout the experiments. 
 
Synthesis of Aerogel Glass Materials 
For a typical synthesis, TEOS, EtOH and H2O were mixed with a molar ratio of 
TEOS:EtOH:H2O=1:4:24. The hydrolysis of TEOS was catalyzed with the addition of HNO3; 
the final pH value of the obtained mixture was about 2. The hydrolysis reaction was continued 
for 30 min at room temperature under vigorous stirring. Afterwards, the obtained TEOS-EtOH-
H2O-HNO3 solution was transferred into closed flasks and aged in a preheated oven at 60°C for 
1 day to reach a complete gelation. The obtained silica hydrogels were then aged 60°C for 1 
week to improve the strength. Thereafter the temperature of the oven was slowly increased to 
120°C to dry the hydrogels, during which the flasks were partly opened for evaporation purpose. 
The obtained dry gels were then annealed at 700°C in air for 3 hours to give the as-prepared 
aerogel glass materials. 
 
Characterization 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-5500) was employed to characterize the 
morphology and microstructure of the obtained samples.  
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a Netzsch STA 449C thermo-
microbalance in air at a heating rate of 10°C min-1.  
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
143
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
Optical properties of the as-prepared samples were measured on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 
1050 UV/VIS/NIR spectrophotometer. Transmittance spectra were collected from 250 to 
3300 nm with a spectral resolution of 1 nm. Total reflectance spectra were collected with a 
150 mm Integrating Sphere Reflectance Accessory; the samples were measured from 250 to 
2500 nm with a spectral resolution of 1 nm.  
Attenuated total reflectance (ATR) Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded 
on a Nicolet 8700 FTIR Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a spectral resolution of 2 cm-1.  
Thermal conductivity of the obtained aerogel glass materials was analyzed by using a Hot 
Disk Thermal Constants Analyzer (Model TPS 2500S). A disk-type Kapton Sensor 5465 with 
radius 3.189 mm was used. The temperature increase of the samples as a function of time was 
recorded to compute the thermal conductivity. The final thermal conductivity value reported here 
was the arithmetic mean of three individual measurements under different measurement 
conditions (heating power: 5–20 mW, measurement time: 5–40 s).  
Mechanical measurement of the samples was performed on a Nanomechanical Testing 
System (TriboIndenter® 900, Hysitron, MN), which is capable of both load and displacement 
controlled modes with load and displacement noise floor of 100 nN and 1 nm, respectively. The 
force-displacement curves were recorded to evaluate the corresponding mechanical properties.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Sol 
 Gel 
 Glass Transformation 
In silica gels made by the hydrolysis of TEOS in alcoholic solution, the net reaction to form 
silica is generally represented as: 
 
Si(OCH2CH3)4 + 2H2O 
 SiO2 + 4CH3CH2OH.                  (1) 
 
The structural characteristics of the obtained silica materials (i.e. texture, density, etc.) are 
strongly dependent on several experimental parameters, such as TEOS concentration, EtOH:H2O 
ratio, and catalyst.19,20 It has been reported that, during the synthesis of silica aerogels, the initial 
polysilicate species formed from the hydrolysis of TEOS are not dense colloidal particles of 
anhydrous silica but instead solvated polymeric chains or clusters;19 therefore the “sol 
 gel” 
transformation or gelation is actually a densification process where the polymeric chains of 
silicate species are jointed together through desiccation. Since silica is mostly active in basic 
environment, it is not surprising that the pH value of the reaction system would significantly 
affect the resulted cross-linked silica network. For example, the bulk density of silica aerogels 
can be as low as 0.015 g/cm3 if the sample is prepared under basic conditions and higher than 0.5 
g/cm3 in acidic catalysis.21,22 It indicates that, although silica colloidal particles are not formed 
during the “sol 
 gel” transformation, base catalyzed polysilicate species before gelation are 
highly branched or collapsed, thus behave as discrete clusters; whereas acid catalyzed silicate 
polymers are highly interpenetrated or entangled, resulting in less free volume upon gelation. For 
the synthesis of aerogel glass materials through densification, a higher density is preferred for 
silica aerogel precursors for the subsequent gel 
 glass transformation, which explains the acid 
catalyzed synthetic procedure employed in this work.   
Figure 1 shows the TGA data of the as-prepared silica hydrogels, indicating the presence of 
two distinctive steps, namely dehydration and dehydroxylation, during the “gel 
 glass” 
transformation. A significant weight loss of about 70% at low temperature region (i.e. T < 
130°C) has been observed, which can be attributed to the loss of pore liquid (e.g. H2O and 
EtOH). As the temperature increases, e.g. from 200°C to 1200°C, there is a negligible weight 
144
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
loss of about 2%, which is related to the dehydroxylation of silica. According to the TGA data, a 
dramatic structural evolution at the low temperature region (i.e. T < 130°C) can be expected. In 
fact, the properties of the final product, i.e. aerogel glass materials in this work, are mostly 
determined by a series of successive gelation and aging steps at this low temperature region.  
 
 
Figure 1. TGA curve of the as-prepared silica hydrogels. 
 
Figure 2 shows the FTIR spectra of the silica hydrogels during the drying process. The silica 
hydrogels feature two predominant absorptions at 3300 (actually a broad band ranging from ~ 
3350 to ~ 3250 cm-1) and 1635 cm-1, which are related to stretching and bending vibrations of 
water molecules, respectively.23-26 The stretching and bending vibrations of the Si-O-Si bridges 
are observed at about 1082 and 437 cm-1, respectively.24-26 The weak absorption at about 970 cm-
1 can be attributed to the surface Si-OH groups.23 Leaving the sample in air for a few hours (e.g. 
3 h in this work) results in the loss of a certain amount of pore liquid, which can readily be 
observed by FTIR spectra, Figure 2b. For example, the intensity of the band at 3300 and 
1635 cm-1 has been drastically attenuated. There are also changes on the band positions and 
intensities for the Si-O and Si-OH vibrations. The fact that these vibrations usually shift to the 
lower wavenumber side (e.g., 1082 
 1032, 970 
 940, 437 
 408 cm-1) indicates a 
continuous gelation and aging process,17-19 where the siloxane bonds are strengthened.25 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
145
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
 
Figure 2. FTIR spectra of the original silica hydrogels (a) and those aged in air for 3 h at 
room temperature (b). 
 
Aerogel Glass Materials 
According to the TGA data (Figure 1), an annealing treatment performed at 700°C has been 
used to prepare aerogel glass materials in this work. The annealing treatment has also been 
performed with different temperatures, where the data will be interpreted and reported later.  
Figure 3 shows typical SEM images of the as-prepared aerogel glass. In general, transparent 
and clear glass-like materials are always obtained in this work. The as-prepared aerogel glass 
materials are flat and smooth (Figure 3a). Detailed SEM analysis (Figure 3b) shows that the as-
prepared aerogel glass materials are actually aggregations of fine particles (diameter < 50 nm), 
which are similar to those observed for silica aerogels.1 
 
 
 
Figure 3. SEM images of the as-prepared aerogel glass materials.  
 
As a potential glazing material, optical properties of the as-prepared aerogel glass materials 
are obviously important. Figure 4 shows the measured UV-VIS-NIR transmittance spectra of the 
as-prepared aerogel glass materials. It can be seen that the materials have a higher visible 
transmittance, Tvis, of about 95.4% at 500 nm, compared to that of the float glass, 92.0%. The 
increased visible transparency of aerogel glass materials represents an interesting feature for 
their applications as glazing materials. Moreover, the obtained aerogel glass materials are 
146
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
probably IR-absorbing, e.g. in the wavelength region of 2500 – 3300 nm, which may be relevant 
for the heat management through the window aperture.8  
 
 
Figure 4. UV-VIS-IR transmittance spectra of the as-prepared aerogel glass and float glass 
for comparison. The absorptions at 860 and 1800 nm are related to detector changes.   
 
Thermal conductivities of the as-synthesized aerogel glass materials have been measured by 
using a transient plane source technique.27 Figure 5 reports the transient graph of the aerogel 
glass, together with that of gloat glass for comparison. The measurement is based on the time-
dependent temperature increase T( ) given by:27   
 
)
(
)
(
2
3
0
D
k
P
T
                          (3) 
 
where P0 is the total output of power from the sensor,  is the overall radius of the disk spiral (  
= 3.189 mm in this work), k is the thermal conductivity of the sample, and D( ) is a 
dimensionless time-dependent function. Apparently, a computational plot of T( ) vs. D( ) will 
result in a straight line, of which the slope is correlated to the heating power P0, the radius of the 
disk spiral , and the thermal conductivity k. Hence, the thermal conductivity of the samples can 
be calculated. In this work, the as-prepared aerogel glass materials have a thermal conductivity 
of about 0.17 W/(mK), compared to about 0.92 W/(mK) for float glass. 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
147
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
 
Figure 5. Transient graph of the as-prepared aerogel glass and float glass for comparison.  
 
The mechanical performance of the obtained aerogel glass materials has been evaluated by 
using the nanoindentation technique. Figure 6 shows the force–displacement curves during the 
measurement, from which the hardness H and elastic modulus Er of the samples can be 
calculated:28 
A
P
H
max                                 (4) 
A
S
Er
2
                              (5) 
 
where Pmax is the maximum load, A is the contact area between the indenter and the material 
surface,  is a constant related to the shape of the indenter, and S is the slope of the initial part of 
the unloading curve. A detailed theoretical consideration has been reported by Fischer-Cripps.29 
In this work, the as-prepared aerogel glass materials exhibit typically a hardness of about 0.53 
GPa and an elastic modulus of about 6.42 GPa. Although the as-prepared aerogel glass materials 
show a pronounced enhancement in mechanical performance of up to three orders of magnitude 
when compared to silica aerogel (i.e. typical elastic modulus of silica aerogels  1–10 MPa),30 
they are probably still weak for glazing applications. For example, float glass has a hardness of 
about 1.64 GPa and an elastic modulus of about 50.77 GPa. In this regard, further work is 
necessary to enhance the mechanical performance of aerogel glass materials while at the same 
time maintaining their improved optical and thermal insulation performance.  
 
148
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
 
Figure 6. Force–displacement curves of the as-prepared aerogel glass materials and float glass 
for comparison. Arrows show the loading ( ) and unloading ( ) curves.  
  
Table 1 summarizes the properties of the as-prepared aerogel glass materials in this work. It 
is obviously necessary and important to enhance further the mechanical properties of aerogel 
glass materials for window glazing applications. Increasing the annealing temperature seems to 
be a straightforward method,17,18,20 though the increased energy consumption and the risk of 
increased thermal conductivity need to be considered. From an economical and large scale 
production point of view, there are also other issues that may affect the process economics. For 
example, the as-prepared aerogel glass materials in this work are pure silica, which may have a 
high material cost when compared to that of float glass. Substituting partly silica with other 
materials such as lime (i.e. CaO) may be interesting to reduce the global cost of the final 
products, though the newly introduced physical and chemical processes during the “sol 
 gel 
 
glass” transformation would require further research efforts. 
 
Table 1. Properties of aerogel glass materials and float glass. 
 
 
(g/cm3) 
Tvis (%) 
at 500 nm 
k 
(W/(mK)) 
Er 
(GPa) 
H 
(GPa) 
Float glass 
2.5 
92.0 
0.92 
50.77 
1.64 
Aerogel glass 
1.8 
95.4 
0.17 
6.42 
0.53 
 
CONCLUSIONS  
Lightweight and thermal insulating aerogel glass materials with excellent visible 
transparency can be prepared by sintering silica aerogel precursors at high temperatures. During 
the densification process, aerogel glass materials gain also enhanced mechanical strength. These 
structural and functional features make aerogel glass materials interesting and attractive for 
window glazing applications, where improving the thermal insulation and reducing the weight of 
the glazing units are important for high performance windows. Further studies are still necessary 
to understand the detailed physical and/or chemical processes during the synthesis of aerogel 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
149
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
glass materials in order to improve further the material performance and to reduce the 
manufacture cost for large scale productions.  
     
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This work has been supported by the Research Council of Norway and several partners 
through “The Research Centre on Zero Emission Buildings” (ZEB). The Research Council of 
Norway is also acknowledged for the support to the Norwegian Micro- and Nano-Fabrication 
Facility, NorFab (197411/V30).  
 
REFERENCES 
1M. A. Aegerter, N. Leventis, and M. M. Koebel, Aerogels Handbook, Springer, New York, 
2011. 
2R. Baetens, B. P. Jelle, and A. Gustavsen, Aerogel Insulation for Building Applications: A 
State-of-the-Art Review, Energy Buildings, 43, 761-769 (2011). 
3T. Gao, B. P. Jelle, A. Gustavsen, and S. Jacobsen, Aerogel-Incorporated Concrete: An 
Experimental Study, Constr. Build. Mater., 52, 130-136 (2014). 
4S. Kim, J. Seo, J. Cha, and S. Kim, Chemical Retreating for Gel-Typed Aerogel and Insulation 
Performance of Cement Containing Aerogel. Constr. Build. Mater., 40, 501-505 (2013). 
5K. Duer, S. Svendsen, Monolithic Silica Aerogel in Superinsulating Glazings, Solar Energy, 63, 
259-267 (1998). 
6K. I. Jensen, J. M. Schultz, and F. H. Kristiansen, Development of Windows Based on Highly 
Insulating Aerogel Glazings. J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 350, 351-357 (2004). 
7A. Gustavsen, S. Grynning, D. Arasteh, B. P. Jelle, and H. Goudey, Key Elements of and 
Material Performance Targets for Highly Insulating Window Frames, Energy Buildings, 43,
2583-2594 (2011). 
8B. P. Jelle, A. Hynd, A. Gustavsen, D. Arasteh, H. Goudey, and R. Hart, Fenestration of Today 
and Tomorrow: A State-of-the-Art Review and Future Research Opportunities, Sol. Energ. Mat. 
Sol. C., 96, 1-28 (2012). 
9T. Gao, B. P. Jelle, and A. Gustavsen, Nanomaterials for Advanced Glazing Technologies, 
Proceedings of CISBAT 2011 (Cleantech for Sustainable Buildings – From Nano to Urban 
Scale), 55-60 (2011). 
10C. Buratti, E. Moretti, Experimental Performance Evaluation of Aerogel Glazing Systems, 
Appl. Energy, 97, 430-437 (2012). 
11T. Woignier, J. Phalippou, and M. Prassas, Glasses from Aerogels. Part 2. The Aerogel-Glass 
Transformation, J. Mater. Sci., 25, 3118-3126 (1990). 
12H. Maleki, L. Durães, and A. Portugal, An Overview on Silica Aerogels Synthesis and 
Different Mechanical Reinforcing Strategies, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 385, 55-74 (2014). 
13D.Y. Nadargi, S.S. Latthe, H. Hirashima, and A.V. Rao, Studies on Rheological Properties of 
Methyltriethoxysilane (MTES) Based Flexible Superhydrophobic Silica Aerogels, Microporous 
Mesoporous Mater., 117, 617-626 (2009). 
14N. Leventis, Three Dimensional Core-Shell Superstructures: Mechanically Strong Aerogels, 
Acc. Chem. Res., 40, 874-884 (2007). 
15J. P. Randall, M. A. B. Meador, and S. C. Jana, Tailoring Mechanical Properties of Aerogels 
for Aerospace Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 3, 613-626 (2011).  
16M. A. B. Meador, S. L. Vivod, L. Mccorkle, D. Quade, R. M. Sullivan, L. N. Ghson, N. Clark, 
and L. A. Capaclona, Reinforcing Polymer Cross-Linked Aerogels with Carbon Nanofibers, J. 
Mater. Chem., 18, 1843-1852 (2008). 
17G. W. Scherer, Aging and Drying of Gels, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 100, 77-92 (1988). 
150
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Synthesis and Characterization of Aerogel Glass Materials for Window Glazing
 
 
18C. J. Brinker, G. W. Scherer, and E. P. Roth, Sol 
 Gel 
 Glass: II. Physical and Structural 
Evolution during Constant Heating Rate Experiments, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 72, 345-368 (1985).  
19C. J. Brinker, G. W. Scherer, Sol 
 Gel 
 Glass: I. Gelation and Gel Structure, J. Non-Cryst. 
Solids, 70, 301-322 (1985). 
20F. Kirkbir, H. Murata, D. Meyers, S. Ray Chaudhuri, and A. Sarkar, Parametric Study of 
Strength of Silica Gels, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 178, 284-292 (1994). 
21R. Vacher, T. Woignier, J. Phalippou, J. Pelous, and E. Courtens, Fractal Structure of Base 
Catalyzed and Densified Silica Aerogels, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 106, 161-165 (1988).   
22T. Woignier, J. Phalippou, and R. Vacher, Parameters Affecting Elastic Properties of Silica 
Aerogels, J. Mater. Res., 4, 688-692 (1989).  
23M. A. Karakassides, D. Gournis, and D. Petridis, An Infrared Reflectance Study of Si-O 
Vibrations in Thermally Treated Alkalisaturated Montmorillonites, Clay Miner., 34, 429-438 
(1999). 
24A. Bertoluzza, C. Fagnano, M. A. Morelli, V. Gottardi, and M. Guglielmi, Raman and Infrared 
Spectra on Silica Gel Evolving Toward Glass, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 48, 117-128 (1982). 
25P. Innocenzi, Infrared Spectroscopy of Sol–Gel Derived Silica-Based Films: A Spectra-
Microstructure Overview, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 316, 309–319 (2003). 
26H. Yoshino, K. Kamiya, and H. Nasu, IR Study on the Structural Evolution of Sol-Gel Derived 
SiO2 Gels in the Early Stage of Conversion to Glasses, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 126, 68-78 (1990). 
27S. E. Gustafsson, Transient Plane Source Techniques for Thermal Conductivity and Thermal 
Diffusivity Measurements of Solid Materials, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 62, 797–804 (1991). 
28C. Y. Xie, Applications of Nanoindentation Techniques in Material Science, Physics (in 
Chinese), 30, 432-435 (2001).  
29A. C. Fischer-Cripps, Nanoindentation, Springer, New York, 2011.  
30R. W. Stark, T. Drobek, M. Weth, J. Fricke, and W. M. Heckl, Determination of Elastic 
Properties of Single Aerogel Powder Particles with the AFM, Ultramicroscopy, 75, 161-169 
(1998).  
151
RETICULATED CERAMICS UNDER BENDING: THE NON-LINEAR REGIME BEFORE 
THEIR CATASTROPHIC FAILURE 
Ehsan Rezaei, Giovanni Bianchi,  Alberto Ortona,
ICIMSI-SUPSI, Strada Cantonale Galleria 2 , 6928, Manno, Switzerland. 
Sandro Gianella
EngiCer, Viale Pereda 22, 6828, Balerna, Switzerland. 
 
ASBTRACT 
Our early experiences with reticulated ceramics under mechanical loads were always 
showing a behavior which is not typical for monolithic ceramics whichare characterized by a 
sudden and catastrophic failure. Conversely, as the material takes the morphology of a solid 
foam, before collapsing, local failure of its struts and nodes is occurring. This phenomenon 
motivated us to further study this non-linear regime in their mechanical behavior. In this work, Si 
infiltrated SiC foams and lattices were mechanically tested by four point bending. In order to 
better understand this phenomenon we coupled standard sensing devices (a linear potentiometric 
position sensor and a load cell) with electrical resistance and acoustical emissions sensors. The 
results show a strong correlation between local failures, electrical resistance and acoustical 
output. We observed that, unlike monoliths, reticulated ceramics experience local cracks in 
multiple zones at the same time. As a result of this, ceramic foams present a certain “degree of 
toughness” which could not be possible if they were monolithic. We show also that the quantity 
of molten Si employed in liquid silicon infiltration, (filling first the intra particle porosity and 
then, if in excess, the cavity of the struts) has a great influence on the final strength of the foam. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Reticulated porous ceramics are a group of cellular ceramics containing cells internally 
attached to each other. Due to the high temperature stability of their skeleton material (above 
1000°C) and  the low density they can be found in advanced engineering applications like 
filtration, components in solid oxide fuel cells, light weight sandwich structures, fixtures for 
space mirrors and solar absorbers. [1][2] [3][4]. There are different techniques for manufacturing 
ceramic foams. Replication of polymeric template foams, direct foaming, and the use of fugitive 
pore formers are considered as the main methods.[5] The material used in this work is a so called 
Si-SiC reticulated foam. It is produced by replica technique as the most well-known method of 
manufacturing ceramic foams.[5][1] Silicon infiltration is then used to convert the residual 
carbons in the pyrolyzed foam into SiC. 
Monolithic ceramics show a linear behavior during mechanical tests and they collapse by 
a sudden propagation of micro-cracks which results in a so called “snap-back” or  catastrophic 
failure.[6] However, the behavior of ceramic foams under bending is rather different from a 
brittle failure. They have a non-linear behavior which allows them to be more damageable.[7][8] 
Meille et. al.[8] observed a relationship between the porosity of the ceramics and their 
damageability. Other studies have tried to understand the influence of pore morphology and pore 
spacing in progressive damage of the porous materials.[9][10][11] This work investigates the 
behavior of ceramic foams in their nonlinear regime discussing the influence of macroporosities 
and microporosities in their behavior. To do this, a number of samples have been tested under 
flexural loading.  
On the other side, integrity monitoring techniques must be used to get more information 
on the state of the damage in the structure. Piezoelectric sensors and optical fibers have been 
used for health monitoring of polymer composites, however their use is rather expensive, 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
152
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
complicated and maybe even unpractical for the ceramic foams. Besides, techniques such as X-
ray, ultrasonic C-scan and infrared thermography normally need the piece to be disassembled 
from its application to go under the testing machine. Recently some researchers have tried to use 
electrical resistance of the material as a self sensing technique of the damage in the 
material.[12][13][14] This method can be industrially practical as it is cheap, simple, doesn’t 
need any embedded sensor within the material and can give real time data about the state of 
damage in the structure. Furthermore, despite the embedded or attached sensors that tend to 
allow for local monitoring, it can monitor the entire structure.[12] Obviously, the use of this 
method depends on the conductivity of the material. Sensitivity of the electrical resistance of the 
component to different cracks also plays an important role in effectiveness of this method. [15] 
The functionality of electrical resistance(ER) monitoring and a low frequency acoustical 
emission(ACE) to detect damage in ceramic foams will be discussed in this work. 
 
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 
The specimens are Si-SiC open-cell foams produced by Erbicol SA, Switzerland. Replica 
technique and Si infiltration have been used which consist of three steps: 
polyurethane foams (10 PPI)  are impregnated into a slurry made of ͣ-SiC, binder and 
solvent.  
After drying, the material is pyrolized to form a carbonaceous macro porous foam. 
Si lumps are then placed on the carbonaceous foam and it is infiltrated by molten Si in 
temperatures ranging 1450°C-1600°C to form ͤ-SiC through reaction bonding with 
carbon, based on the following chemical reaction[13]: 
Siliquid + Csolid = SiCsolid   [͇H = -73kj/mol] 
The product is a macro porous open cell foam with a skeletons consisting of ͤ-SiC bound 
with the initial ͣ-SiC powders and Si. [16] Three batches of Si-SiC foams with different Si 
content were made. The carbonaceous foam for all the three types are the same and just the 
amount of Si used for infiltration changes. Test pieces are cut into bars of 
(15 25 170)mm3±0.05. The lower and upper surfaces which are in contact with the bending 
fixtures are machined in order to satisfy the flatness and parallelism conditions for a bending test. 
Copper plates and thin copper wires were used for the brazing and ER measurements. 
Brazing was performed using Cusil-ABA paste from Morgan Crucible Company, UK. The 
process of ER measurement is done all by Labview using National Instruments’ DAQ9219. 
Acoustical variations were recorded by a microphone(Sennheiser MD321N). The data were 
recorded in the frequency of 51.2kHz  by DAQ 9234 from National Instruments. The four point 
flexure tests were performed using a universal testing machine(Zwick/Roell Z050). A 5kN load 
cell and a linear potentiometric position sensor(LPPS) were used to measure the vertical load and 
the deflection of the beam. The crosshead speed of 0.1mm/min and preload of 10N was chosen 
for all the samples. All information were recorded and synchronized using National 
Instruments’s DAQ 9219 and Labview. An isolating box was built to separate the testing 
environment in order to prepare an stabilized temperature inside the box and also to reduce the 
ambient noise. Bend testing loading points were also all isolated from the test pieces by very thin 
plastic sheets.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Material characterization 
Table 1 summarizes the properties of all three batches. The pore size and strut thickness 
were measured by averaging a number of thirty measurements on different samples. The aspect 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
153
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
ratio is measured from computed tomography pictures.  Other properties of these foams can be 
found in our previous works[17]  
 
Table 1. Different characteristics of the samples used in the study. 
I.D. 
Free Si 
(wt.%) 
Number of 
specimens 
Average strut 
thickness (mm) 
Macroporosity 
(%) 
Strut 
microporosity 
(%) 
A 
30 
21 
0.84±0.13 
87 
9.2 
B 
22 
23 
0.80±0.15 
87 
13.3 
C 
12 
20 
0.85±0.13 
87 
17.7 
 
Comparing the three batches together shows that as Si content increases the mechanical 
properties of the foams are enhanced. This was expected because when Si is introduced to the 
carbonaceous foam, it starts to form ͤ-SiC and also fill the microporosities inside the struts 
which improves the mechanical properties of the skeleton. After filling the porosity, the extra 
amount of Si starts to fill the triangular cavity inside all the struts. This behavior results in a 
higher density for the foams with higher Si content. This is different than literature works that 
typically increase the relative density by changing the struts’ thickness. A schematic image of a 
cross section of struts with different content of free Si is depicted in Figure 1 comparing the 
struts in the current study with literature. 
 
 
Figure 1. A schematic image comparing the two approach for increasing SiSiC foams’ relative 
density. (A)Increasing relative density by decreasing macroporosities in the skeleton. 
(B)Increasing the relative density by increasing the struts’ diameter. The black parts are the 
porosities inside the struts, the white ones are the filled porosities by Si and gray color shows 
SiC.    
 
154
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
 
Figure 2. Microscopic image of the grains and distribution of free Si inside the struts. The white 
color is Si, gray ones are SiC and porosities are shown by black. 
 
Microscopic images are also shown in Figure 2 to have a better understanding of the 
inner structure of the materials in each of the sample types. Foams of batch C are full of cavities 
inside the struts, however it is probable that a portion of these holes are made during the 
polishing procedure. Anyway batch A foams look more homogeneous and many struts are filled 
completely with Si as shown in the picture.    
To understand how repeatable our samples have been the data concerning the density and initial 
resistance are gathered here. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the density in the samples. Low 
relative standard deviations for all of them shows the low density variation in the samples.  
 
 
Figure 3. The variation of density in the samples of each batch. 
 
Figure 4 displays the distribution of initial resistance that was measured between the two 
brazed copper plate. The data are extremely scattered with high values of standard deviation. 
This can be considered also normal due to the fact that ER measurements are highly dependent 
on the quality of brazing. 
 
0.35
0.37
0.39
0.41
0.43
0.450.46
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
density (g/cm3)
frequency
100Si
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
density (g/cm3)
frequency
60Si
0.35
0.36
0.37
0.38
0.39
0.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
80Si
density (g/cm3)
frequency
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
155
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
 
Figure 4. The variation of initial resistance of the foams for each batch. 
 
Table 2. Average ER and density of the samples and their relative standard deviations. 
Density 
Average 
(g/cm3) 
Relative standard 
deviation(%) 
0.40 
5.75 
0.37 
3.51 
0.33 
5.45 
 
Bending 
Figure 5 shows the nonlinear saw-tooth shape behavior observed for three samples of each 
batch of our foams. All the foams were broken in two parts with behaviors similar to what is 
shown in Figure 5. Mechanical behavior of these foams under bending  faces two main regimes: 
A linear elastic regime due to the deflection of struts which is the same as a brittle 
behavior before failure. 
A nonlinear regime which continues by failing of more struts until the abrupt final failure 
occurs. 
 
Figure 5. The saw-tooth behavior of the foams under bending for one sample of each batch. 
 
As typical for the four-point flexural tests, a constant shear force is introduced in the right 
and left side of the specimen which is negligible in the failure of thin beams as their value is 
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
Initial Resistance (
)
frequency
100Si
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
80Si
Initial Resistance (
)
frequency
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
60Si
Initial Resistance (
)
frequency
156
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
much lower than the bending stresses. There is a large scatter in the test results which is due to 
the various flaw sizes responsible for the failure in each specimen. In order to properly represent 
the scattered test results. typically a probabilistic technique is used by Weibull statistics. For a 
two parameter Weibull function with a set of strength data for pieces with the same geometry 
and material, tested under the same configurations, probability of survival(S) can be calculated 
using Weibull modulus(m) and the scale parameter, ͵ͪ as follows: 
 
͵
͵ͪ
  
 
 
To calculate the two parameters of m and ͵Υ a numerical method is used based on linear 
least square. The rupture stresses taken from the flexural tests(n samples) are ordered from the 
lowest value to the highest and a Sj is assigned to each of them(jth sample) using the following 
estimator: 
 
 
 
The result shows that higher amount of free Si in the samples results in higher strength. 
Figure 6 depicts the Weibull distribution for all three types of the samples. Weibull modulus 
increases as the amount of Si in the samples increases. A linear regression with confidence 
interval of 90% was used for data fitting using MATLAB statistics toolbox. Table 3 summarizes 
the calculated Weibull parameters for each group of the samples. 
 
 
Figure 6. Weibull distribution for the three types of the samples. 
 
Table 3.Calculated Weibull parameters. 
Type 
Weibull modulus 
͵ͪ (MPa) 
Coefficient of determination, R2 
A 
7.58±1.03 
3.310±0.682 
0.8957 
B 
4.30±0.63 
2.178±0.256 
0.8694 
C 
3.66±0.18 
1.123±0.006 
0.9861 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
157
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
The low Weibull modulus for batch C and also B reveals high amount of scatter in the 
results and a wide distribution of flaws in the sample. The reason can be due to presence of the 
triangular cavity inside the ligaments which are suspected to be the main origin of failure in the 
struts.[18] These cavities are mainly filled with Si for samples of group A which have a higher 
Weibull modulus and also a much higher flexural strength. 
Images of the sample pieces were taken before and after the test. Figure 7 displays failure 
plane location in each of the samples. In batch A, all the samples collapsed between the upper 
two loading points. In batch B one specimen and in batch C almost three specimen failed out of 
the pure bending area. This can be due to the reason that for weaker samples the uniformity of 
the load becomes more and more important in flexural tests. On the other side, for materials with 
low Weibull modulus it is normal to have a number of samples(around 10% of them) fracturing 
outside of the inner gage area. 
 
 
Figure 7. Frequency of failure location. From left to right for batch A, B and C. 
 
To understand better about the location of the cracks, one of the samples (from batch A) 
was chosen to be stopped in the middle of bending test and was observed under the microscope. 
Microscopic observations showed that all the observable cracks were on the tension side of the 
specimen (and not the compression side) which means that the tension side of the foam fails 
faster than the compression side.(Figure 8)  
 
 
Figure 8. Cracks observed in middle of the bending test. 
 
Damage monitoring 
It was interesting to see that both ER and ACE techniques show good correlations with 
the measured results of the vertical load over the samples. Noises in the frequencies out of 2-
20kHz were cut by means of a butterfly filter. ACE and ER data had the noise amplitude of 
0.21±0.3dB and 1±0.5mࠫ respectively. At last, a threshold of 1dB and 3mࠫ were defined as 
minimum ACE and ER variations. The hits(events) were then saved into MATLAB objects 
whenever a change higher than noise levels was observed in each of load, ACE amplitudes or ER 
values. Figure 9 and 10 show an example of data captured by acquisition systems. 
158
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
 
Figure 9. A sample ER monitoring data with the flexural test parameters. 
 
 
Figure 10. A sample ACE monitoring data with the flexural test parameters 
 
 
 
Figure 11. The ACE hits are all detected for batch A. The red circles are the events not detected 
by the ER measurements. The bars show the probability of having red circles in every 0.1 
relative deflection.    
 
Table 4. Detailed data for events detected by ACE and ER . 
Batch 
All Hits 
Hits/sample 
Detected events by: 
ACE 
 ER 
load drops 
A 
164 
7.8 
100% 
54% 
80% 
B 
126 
5.5 
100% 
66% 
84% 
C 
92 
4.6 
96% 
71% 
80% 
 
The results show that for the batch A , 164 hits have been detected for a total number of 
21 samples. It is observed that whenever a load drop has been occurred an ACE hit has been also 
recorded(except 3 hits for batch C). 46% of the events(for batch A) are not registered by ER 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
6
12
18
24
30
Relative Deflection
Amplitude(dB)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency(%)
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
159
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
measurements. However in higher amplitudes the number of undetected events decreases 
significantly. The same thing was observed from the results of the other two types of samples 
(Figure 12 and Figure 13). Although this doesn’t mean that ER monitoring is not capable of 
detecting those events, but it can be a reason to say that the chosen configuration for ER 
monitoring system was not sensitive enough to capture those events, in other words, the 
threshold of ER monitoring system must be much lower than 3mࠫ to be capable of capturing 
small hits.  
 
 
Figure 12. The ACE hits are all detected for batch B. The red circles are the events not detected 
by the ER measurements. The bars show the probability of having red circles in every 0.1 
relative deflection.    
 
 
Figure 13. The hits detected for batch C. All except four event are detected by ACE. The red 
circles are the events not detected by the ER measurements. The bars show the probability of 
having red circles in every 0.1 relative deflection.    
 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
Relative Deflection
Amplitude(dB)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency(%)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
3
6
9
12
15
Relative Deflection
Amplitude(dB)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
10
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency(%)
160
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
 
Figure 14. Histogram of the Amplitude range for each batch. 
 
A probability distribution of the amplitude range for ACE data(Figure 14) shows that the 
probability that a failed strut or node emits a low ACE energy is higher for batch C while batch 
A and B released sounds in a wider range of amplitudes.  As depicted in Figure 15 and Figure 16 
both ER and ACE show well correlations with the load drops in each event. Based on these 
information, it can be hypothesized that the high amplitude events attributed to the big nodes or 
fully filled struts while the low amplitude ones are related to very weak struts that are highly 
porous or contain pre-existing cracks. As it is mentioned also by Dharmasena et al.[19] in ER 
monitoring the current passes mainly through the struts parallel to the main current flow. Thus 
events with high ACE amplitude and low ER might be due to the failure of ligaments 
perpendicular to current flow through the cells.  
 
 
Figure 15. The correlation between ER variations with the load drops. Black, green and red 
circles represent the A, B and C batches. each circle is an event recorded by ER measurement 
system. 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
161
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
 
Figure 16. The correlation between ACE and the load drops. Black, green and red circles 
represent the A, B and C samples. each circle is an event recorded by ACE measurement system. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Three batches of Si-SiC replicated foams with the same morphologies (pore size and 
elongation) and different Si content were examined under four point flexural test. The use of ER 
and ACE monitoring devices along with LPPS and the load cell resulted in a set of data giving 
in-situ information about the introduced damage in the foams. ACE technique showed to be 
more reliable in detecting the cracks. Results of ER monitoring were in accordance with the 
other data but practical use of this method needs further investigation to improve the sensibility 
of the technique. By increasing Si content in the foam, firstly ͤ-SiC is formed, and then the 
micro-porosities and the cavities inside the ligaments are filled with Si which results from a 
stronger constituent material and hence a stronger foam. Microscopic pictures were also 
confirming the fact that the micro and macro porosities are filled gradually by increasing the Si 
content. Weibull moduli of 7.58, 4.30 and 3.66 for batch A, B and C respectively, showed the 
high scatter in the strength results, especially for batch C. It is presumed that microporosities 
inside the struts of batch B and C cause a wide flaw distribution resulting in low Weibull moduli. 
On the other side the results of monitoring devices showed that the hits/sample parameter varies 
similar to the Weibull moduli(7.8, 5.5 and 4.6 for batch A, B and C respectively). A brittle 
material fails catastrophically and will have a hits/sample ratio equal to one. As the hits/sample 
ratio increases the material shows a higher toughness and will fail due to accumulation of cracks 
in the failure zone. Higher values for batch A shows that the behavior of the foam is more 
successful in stopping the rapid accumulation of cracks in the failure zone.   
REFERENCES
162
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
thesis,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences,
In Proc.of SEMAnnual Conference &Exposition on Experimental and
Applied Mechanics
Mechanics of
Materials,
Journal of the European Ceramic Society,
Journal of the American Ceramic
Society,
Journal of the European Ceramic Society,
Journal of materials science,
Smart Materials and Structures,
NDT&EInternational,
Scripta Materialia, ,
International Journal of Fatigue,
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
163
Reticulated Ceramics under Bending: Non-Linear Regime before Catastrophic Failure
Advanced Engineering Materials,
Advanced Engineering Materials,
Acta metallurgica et materialia,
JOURNAL OF MATERIALS RESEARCH PITTSBURGH ,
International Journal of Solids and Structures,
Journal of Materials Science,
Scr.
Metall.,
Materials science forum,
165
NOVEL LOW TEMPERATURE CERAMICS FOR CO2 CAPTURE 
 
Hutha Sarma, and Steven Ogunwumi 
Corning Incorporated 
Corning, NY, USA 
 
ABSTRACT 
Porous ceramic honeycomb structures are being explored as purely structural members to 
support catalysts used in various filtration applications like CO2 capture. High temperature firing, 
an essential part of conventional ceramic fabrication, is highly complex and capital intensive, 
besides having a large CO2 footprint. Also, unlike the underlying ceramic, most of the catalysts 
cannot withstand high temperatures. Hence, the manufacture of these articles is a two–step 
process: (1) Production of the ceramic substrate; (2) Subsequent application of the catalyst.  
In this paper, a novel low temperature firing/heat treatment approach for ceramic 
processing is proposed, so as to render high temperature firing unnecessary.  Preliminary data 
indicating that this low temperature approach could yield extruded ware with sufficient strength 
so as to be attractive to applications where refractoriness is not a premium, is also presented. 
Such a low temperature processing would render co-extrusion of catalysts and sorbents (e.g., 
zeolites) feasible. This in turn would not only lead to a simple, one–step process, but also result 
in a “greener” process with low CO2 footprint, thus making it a sustainable and attractive 
approach for filtration and sequestration of CO2 applications. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Typical ceramic honeycomb manufacturing process is very complex, and involves 
batching, forming (extrusion), drying, firing, and finishing. Of these, firing is by far the most 
capital intensive and time consuming.  It is sensitive to raw materials, product attributes 
(porosity, coefficient of thermal expansion [CTE], etc.). However, high temperature (>1000 C) 
is not mandatory for most catalytic and separation or filtration applications. Since costs & 
difficulty to fire do not scale linearly with firing temperature, high temperature firing is to be 
avoided if possible, especially for applications that do not need refractoriness. Some of the 
reasons for firing ceramics are as follows: 
To burn out forming/processing (e.g., extrusion) enablers (e.g., Hydroxy Methyl Cellulose, 
Sodium stearate, etc.), and pore formers (e.g., starch, graphite, etc.): This can be achieved at 
temperatures below 800 – 1000 C. 
To form the desired phases, in–situ (reaction sintering): This is not necessary, if the final 
phases are already present in the batch materials.  
To impart strength (sintering) 
To expose the ware to a temperature greater than operating temperature, so as to avoid 
shrinkage during operation: This is not necessary if the body has negligible shrinkage. 
 
It is evident that any replacement to firing, should meet the last two aforementioned 
objectives: (1) Ware has sufficient strength; and (2) It meets shrinkage requirements. Here an 
alternative, low temperature firing approach to honeycomb fabrication is proposed, and some 
preliminary data regarding strength and shrinkage is  presented. Throughout this paper, the 
phrase low temperature firing is used to refer to firing temperatures <1000 C, with the typical 
firing temperature used being between 600 – 800 C.   
 
 
 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
166
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
METHODOLOGY 
The proposed approach, involves no high temperature firing for fabrication of ceramic 
bodies. It is fairly generic, and could be used whether the ceramic ware is to be made of silica, 
SiC, mullite or ash. The chief ingredients (see Fig. 1) of the novel, low-temperature-fired 
compositions that have been included in this study, are as follows: 
 
CERAMIC FILLER 
Any ceramic particles may be used. In-fact, due to its cost effectiveness, as well as 
environmental impact, ash from power plants is a very attractive candidate. Preliminary results 
validate ash to be a viable candidate. Since the filler is the dominant phase in the composition, 
ranging between 40 – 90 wt.%, a low CTE material would lead to a better thermal shock 
resistance (TSR) for the extruded ware, if the application requires considerable thermal 
gradients. To ameliorate thermal shock, especially when using materials with high intrinsic CTE, 
segmentation may also be considered.  
 
FIBER PHASE 
Fibers are used to enhance the strength and toughness of extruded ware2. Refractory 
ceramic fibers (RCFs, e.g., asbestos, rock wool, glass fibers), though excellent tougheners, are 
being phased out, and hence, have become costly. Any material with aspect ratio would behave 
akin to fibers. Wollastonite and halloysite are examples of cheap, benign, natural materials. In 
the compositions tested, the fiber phase ranged from 5 – 50 wt.%. 
 
HIGH TEMPERATURE BINDER 
Any colloidal phase may be used to bond the filler and fiber particles, thus imparting 
strength to the extruded body at high temperatures (>300 C), where no organic binder is likely to 
survive. Due to its extensive usage as binder, colloidal silica would be an excellent choice for 
this phase. The amount of binder used could be between 5 – 25 wt.%. 
 
ORGANIC ADDITIVES 
Their chief purpose is to provide batch rheology that would enable extrusion and impart 
some green strength to the extruded ware. The amount of such extrusion aids is purely dictated 
by processing constraints, and since these materials are burnt away during firing, and hence 
absent from the final article, the actual amounts used are of no practical relevance. Hydroxy 
Methyl Cellulose, Poly Vinyl Alcohol, and Sodium Stearate are a few examples of extrusion aids 
extensively used in the industry.  
 
MISCELLANEOUS ADDITIVES 
Dispersants, humectants, plasticizers or non-aqueous mixing media may be added if 
needed.  
 
Batches consisting of the aforementioned ingredients were prepared. After thorough mixing 
of the dry ingredients, liquids were added so as to make an extrudable paste. These pastes were 
subsequently extruded in to rods and honeycombs, dried, and subsequently fired at various 
temperatures. Physical property data like shrinkage, porosity and modulus of rupture (MOR) 
were obtained for these various samples. 
 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
In the subsequent sections, properties of a few compositions are presented in order to 
make a case for a non-fired  substrate approach as an alternative to firing. Fused silica and 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
167
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
Wollastonite were chosen as the ceramic filler and fiber phases respectively. Detailed 
experimentation regarding optimization of the various batch contents were carried out, but for 
the sake of brevity and proprietary reasons, are not presented here.  
Images of extruded ware are shown in Fig. 2. MOR is frequently used as a proxy for 
strength. MOR and CTE for cast sheets (and fired at 600 C for 3hrs.) as a function of their 
Wollastonite content are shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 respectively. It is evident from these plots 
that Wollastonite levels beyond 25 wt.% only increase the CTE at no significant MOR 
improvements. Wollastonite level could be adjusted to yield ware with the required MOR and 
CTE.  Similar data may be obtained for any other fiber phases as well.  
 
STRENGTH OF LOW TEMPERATURE FIRED WARE 
MOR values of extruded rods, for some compositions, as a function of calcination (firing) 
temperature are shown in Fig. 5. As is evident from these data, MOR increases with firing 
temperature, and several compositions have strengths comparable to or better than fired 
cordierite bodies, of comparable porosity, after firing at just 600 C, which is well below the 
usual cordierite firing temperature (~1425 C). 
 
SHRINKAGE 
Shrinkage and porosity data for one of the compositions tested,  are presented in Fig. 6. 
The substrate is porous for coatings. Extruded ware from this composition shrinks by 0.5% 
between 600 and 1000 C, a value small enough that it may be accounted for via other 
engineering solutions (e.g., usage of compressible materials as fixture supports2). Thus, ware 
fired at 600 C may be used up to an operating temperature of ~1000 C. 
 
CO2 CAPTURE TEST  
Testing was performed using a molecular sieve zeolite that has an adsorption capacity of 
2.8 mol CO2/Kg sorbent in powder form. Good adhesion between the extruded honeycomb and 
coating was observed (for e.g., see Fig. 2). A capacity of 2.6 mol CO2/Kg was measured when 
the sorbent was applied on to a honeycomb and tested. The test condition was 90% CO2/10% N2 
at 500 SCCM. The equilibrium adsorption capacity of the powdered sorbent measured showed a 
minor change in the results obtained, compared to the un-fired or low temperature honeycomb 
comprising the same sorbent. Further process optimization is expected to make the change 
negligible. 
 
SUMMARY 
High temperature firing (firing temperature >1000 C), an essential part of conventional 
ceramic fabrication, is highly complex and capital intensive. Preliminary data indicates that a 
novel low temperature approach, that does not require high temperature firing, could yield 
extruded ware with sufficient strength so as to be attractive to applications where refractoriness 
is not a premium. Such a low temperature processing would render co-extrusion of catalysts and 
sorbents (e.g., zeolites) feasible. Preliminary results of the concept using a molecular sieve 
adsorbent was very promising. The equilibrium adsorption capacity of the powdered sorbent 
measured showed a minor change in the results obtained compared to the low temperature fired 
honeycomb comprising the sorbent. Further process optimization is expected to make the change 
negligible. 
 
REFERENCES 
1Hilling, W. B.  Annual Review of Materials Science, Vol. 17: 341-383, 1987, Strength and 
Toughness of Ceramic Matrix Composites; http://www.geo2tech.com/tech.html 
168
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
2J.S. Kim,  et al.,  International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 44 (2002) 2285–2315; US patent 
7047641 
 
Fig. 1. Block diagram illustrating the basic ingredients of a low temperature firing composition.
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
169
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
 
Fig. 2. (a, b): Optical images of an extruded honeycomb.(c): SEM image of the fractured section 
of a green substrate, wherein the elongated phase corresponds to Wollastonite fibers, whose 
distribution in the plane of the cell walls is evident. Also notable is the fact that the fibers 
survived extrusion. (d): SEM image of polished section of a coated honeycomb, demonstrating 
good adherence between the honeycomb and the coating.  
(a) 
(b)
(c) 
(d)
170
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
MOR Calcined, psi
Fiber, wt.%
 
Fig. 3. Plot depicting the dependence of MOR on the amount of Wollastonite in cast sheets, fired 
at 600 C for 3hrs. As expected the strength (as inferred from MOR values) increases with 
increasing Wollastonite content, peaking at ~25% Wollastonite, and stays roughly constant 
thereafter. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
CTE, 10^-7/C
Fiber, wt.%
 
Fig. 4. Plot depicting the dependence of CTE on the amount of Wollastonite in cast sheets, fired 
at 600 C for 3hrs. CTE tends to increase linearly with increasing Wollastonite content, but 
shows an inflection point between the two linear regimes.  Wollastonite content of the pastes to 
be extruded may be chosen so as to tailor the CTE to the particular application. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
171
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
JJS-867
JJT-867
JLK-867
JJI-867
JJJ-867
MOR (psi)
Green MOR
MOR (300C/3h)
MOR (600C/3h)
MOR (1000C/3h)
 
Fig. 5. Sample plot showing the MOR values for some of the batches extruded into rods, and 
fired at three different temperatures, 300, 600 & 1000 C, for 3hrs. MOR values increase with 
firing temperature, which may be due to the onset of sintering. This hypothesis is corroborated 
by the reduction in specific surface area observed. For comparison, MOR value for fired 
Cordierite rods, of comparable porosity, is shown by the dashed line. The five batches shown 
here differ in compositional details like the particle size distribution (PSD) of the filler phase 
used and the amount of the fiber phase, colloidal silica phase used.  
Fired Cordierite 
    Batch 1 
Batch 2
   Batch 3
     Batch 4  
Batch 5
172
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Novel Low Temperature Ceramics for CO2 Capture
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Porosity (%)
Shrinkage, %
Firing temperature, deg C
Diameter shrinkage (%)
Porosity (%)
 
Fig. 6. Plot depicting porosity (vol.%) and linear shrinkage as a function of firing temperature, 
for a typical low temperature fired composition. No major change in dimensions was observed 
between 600 and 1000 C. The data is for a fired rod. No pore-former was used in this 
composition, and hence the porosity measured, via Mercury intrusion, is in the mid 30% range as 
expected.   
173
EFFECTS OF SiC PARTICLE SIZE AND SINTERING TEMPERATURE ON 
MICROSTRUCTURE OF POROUS SiC CERAMICS BASED ON IN–SITU GRAIN 
GROWTH 
Katsumi Yoshida, Chin-Chet See, Satoshi Yokoyama, Toyohiko Yano 
Research Laboratory for Nuclear Reactors, Tokyo Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, JAPAN 
 
ABSTRACT 
Porous silicon carbide (SiC) ceramics were fabricated based on in-situ grain growth, and the 
effects of -SiC particle size and sintering temperature on the microstructure of the porous SiC 
ceramics were investigated. In the case of submicron-sized (average particle size; 0.3 m) -SiC 
particles, grain growth was promoted and the formation of plate-like grains started at 2050oC, 
and the porous SiC ceramics consisted of plate-like SiC grains of around 10-20 m at 2150oC. 
Whereas SiC grains were not grown in porous SiC ceramics using micron-sized (2.3 m) -SiC 
particles sintered at 2000oC, the porous SiC ceramics with a unique morphology of entangled 
large plate-like SiC grains of about 30-40 m in maximum were achieved at 2150oC. XRD 
analysis suggested that the formation of 6H phase was promoted in the porous SiC ceramics 
using the submicron-sized or the micron-sized -SiC powder with the small amount of Al and B 
additions at 2150oC, and the plate-like SiC grains mainly corresponded to 6H phase. On the other 
hand, coarse -SiC particles (5.9 m) did not grow into plate-like shapes at 2150oC in spite of 
Al-B-C addition. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Silicon carbide (SiC) is one of the attractive materials for structural applications such as 
aerospace industries, nuclear applications and high-temperature gas turbine since it shows high 
thermal and chemical stability, high stiffness, high hardness, high thermal conductivity, excellent 
oxidation, corrosion and wear resistance, high mechanical strength at high-temperatures, low 
thermal expansion, and good resistance to high-energy neutron irradiation.1-7 Recently, porous 
ceramics have received great attention in many fields. Porous ceramics have been traditionally 
used as heat insulating materials and refractories. Furthermore, porous ceramics have been 
expected to be applied as catalyst carrier, diesel particulate filter (DPF), membranes for gas 
separation, filters for water purification, adsorbent, electrodes for batteries, and bone-graft 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII.
Edited by Roger Narayan and Paolo Colombo
 
Copyright © 2015 The American Ceramic Society.
174
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
substitutes and so on.8,9 Currently, porous SiC ceramics has been commercially used for DPF.9
Pore size control and surface functionalization of porous ceramics have been strongly 
required to extend their applications. Present authors have proposed the surface functionalization 
of porous ceramics based on in-situ grain growth.10,11 Figure 1 shows the concept of the porous 
ceramics with in-situ grain growth. The authors paid attention to the interesting structures seen in 
nature such as calcareous caves for the surface functionalization of porous ceramics. In our study, 
in-situ grain growth has been defined as the grain growth and the grain orientation on the 
sintered surface such as the surface and/or inside of pore walls and frameworks in porous 
ceramics, and we have tried to fabricate porous ceramics based on in-situ grain growth. In our 
previous study, porous SiC ceramics with in-situ plate-like grain growth were successfully 
achieved by pressureless-sintering at 2150oC for 30 min using submicron-sized -SiC powder 
and 0.1 wt% aluminum (Al) - 0.15 wt% boron (B) - 1.00 wt% carbon (C) additives.10,11 In 
addition, aluminum nitrate enneahydrate (Al(NO3)3•9H2O) was effective to enhance plate-like 
grain growth in porous SiC ceramics because Al from Al(NO3)3•9H2O would be distributed 
homogeneously on the SiC powder rather than metallic Al powder. The pore size distribution of 
the porous SiC ceramics with in-situ grain growth was bimodal, and larger pores (around 8 m) 
and smaller pores (around 1 
m) would be formed by pore formers and the gaps among 
plate-like grains, respectively.
In this study, three kinds of -SiC powders with different particle sizes were used as the 
starting materials, and the effects of 
-SiC particle size and sintering temperature on 
microstructure of porous SiC ceramics based on in-situ grain growth were investigated. 
 
Figure 1. The concept of the porous ceramics with in-situ grain growth. 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
175
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
 
Figure 2. SEM micrographs of -SiC powder used as the starting materials. (a) Submicron-sized 
(average particle size; 0.3 m), (b) micron-sized (2.3 m) and (c) coarse -SiC powder (5.3 m) 
 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Submicron-sized (average particle size; 0.3 m), micron-sized (2.3 m) or coarse -SiC 
powder (5.3 m) was used as the starting materials. Figure 2 shows SEM micrographs of -SiC 
powder used as the starting materials. In this study, Al-B-C system was selected as the sintering 
additives and grain growth promotors. Al-B-C system has been known as the sintering additives 
for SiC.12,13 As compared with the reports on the densification of SiC using Al-B-C sintering 
additives, the present amount of the sintering additives was extremely low in order to form 
porous structure in SiC ceramics.12,13 Cao et al. fabricated dense SiC ceramics using -SiC 
powder and Al-B-C additives (3 wt% Al - 0.6 wt% B - 2 wt% C) by hot-pressing, and plate-like 
grains were grown in the dense SiC ceramics.13 The compositions of B (Rare Metallic Co., Ltd., 
Japan) and C (Asahi Thermal, Asahi Carbon Co., Ltd., Japan) were 0.15 wt% and 1.00 wt%, 
respectively. Aluminum nitrate enneahydrate (Al(NO3)3•9H2O; Nacalai Tesque, Inc., Japan) was 
used as the Al source, and the composition of Al was adjusted to 0.1 wt%. Beta-SiC powder and 
sintering additives were mixed by wet ball-milling for 24 h using SiC balls, and then dried with a 
rotary evaporator. The dried powder was crushed with SiC mortar and pestle, followed by 
176
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
sieving with mesh with opening of 300 
m. Spherical polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) 
particles (MR-30, average particle size; 30 m, Soken Chemical & Engineering Co., Ltd., Japan) 
were used as pore formers to fabricate porous SiC ceramics. PMMA particles were added to the 
starting powders. The amount of PMMA particles was 17 wt% (40 vol%). The powder was 
mixed with SiC mortar and pestle. After mixing, the powder was sieved through mesh with 
opening of 300 m. The powder was formed into a cylindrical compact by uniaxial pressing at 
17 MPa, followed by heat-treatment at 400oC for 1h in air at a heating rate of 1oC/min in order to 
remove the PMMA particles in the compacts. The compacts were pressureless-sintered at 
1850-2150oC for 30 min in argon atmosphere at a heating rate of 30oC/min. The compacts were 
heated under vacuum from room temperature to 1500oC. After being held at 1500oC under 
vacuum for 30 min, argon gas was fed into the furnace, and the compacts were heated to the 
desired temperature in argon flow. Bulk density and open porosity of the porous SiC ceramics 
were measured by Archimedes’ method. Their microstructure was observed with a field emission 
scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; S-4800, Hitachi, Ltd., Japan). Crystalline phases of the 
porous SiC ceramics were identified by a powder X-ray diffraction analysis (PW-1700, Philips, 
the Netherlands) and the distribution of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC ceramics was 
determined by Ruska’s method.14 
 
RESULTS 
 
Porous SiC Ceramics using Submicron-Sized -SiC Powder (0.3 m) 
Figure 3 shows SEM micrographs of the porous SiC ceramics using submicron-sized -SiC 
powder sintered at 1850oC-2150oC. At 1850oC and 1950oC, grain growth did not occur during 
sintering, and plate-like SiC grains were not observed. At 2050oC, grain growth was promoted 
and the formation of plate-like grains started. At 2150oC, the porous SiC ceramics consisted of 
plate-like SiC grains of around 10-20 m, and the plate-like SiC grains stuck out of the walls of 
pores and the sintered surface in the porous SiC ceramics. Bulk density and open porosity of the 
porous SiC ceramics sintered at 2150oC were 1.43 g/cm3 and 52.0 %, respectively. Their volume 
shrinkage after sintering at 2150oC was around 5 %. 
Fractions of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC ceramics using the submicron-sized -SiC 
powder sintered at 1850oC-2150oC are listed in Table I. The porous SiC ceramics sintered at 
1850oC and 1950oC mainly consisted of 3C ( -SiC), and the fraction of 3C in the porous SiC 
ceramics was around 90 %. The fraction of 3C decreased and the formation of 6H ( -SiC) was 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
177
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
enhanced with increasing sintering temperature, and the fraction of 6H in the porous SiC 
ceramics sintered at 2150oC was 76 %. In addition, the fraction of 4H ( -SiC) also increased 
from 1 % to 8 %. From this result, it is suggested that the plate-like SiC grains formed in the 
porous SiC ceramics during sintering mainly corresponded to 6H phase. 
 
Porous SiC Ceramics using Micron-Sized -SiC Powder (2.3 m) 
Figure 4 exhibits SEM micrographs of the porous SiC ceramics using micron-sized -SiC 
powder sintered at 2000oC and 2150oC. Whereas SiC grains were not grown in porous SiC 
ceramics sintered at 2000oC, large SiC grains were observed in porous SiC ceramics sintered at 
2150oC. Large plate-like SiC grains of about 30-40 m in maximum grew during sintering and 
the porous SiC ceramics consisted of entangled large plate-like SiC grains. In addition, the 
number and the size of gaps among plate-like grains also increased with increasing the particle 
size of the starting -SiC powder. Bulk density of the porous SiC ceramics sintered at 2150oC 
was 1.13 g/cm3 and their open porosity was 65.7 %. The volume shrinkage of the porous SiC 
ceramics sintered at 2150oC was about 6 %. The porous SiC ceramics using the micron-sized 
-SiC powder showed higher open porosity than the porous SiC ceramics using the 
Figure 3. SEM micrographs of the porous SiC ceramics using submicron-sized -SiC 
powder (0.3 m) sintered at (a) 1850oC, (b) 1950oC, (c) 2050oC and (d) 2150oC.
178
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
submicron-sized -SiC powder due to the increase in the number and the size of gaps among 
plate-like grains and the pore size formed by pore formers. 
Fractions of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC ceramics using the micron-sized -SiC powder 
sintered at 2000oC and 2150oC are listed in Table I. At 2000oC, 3C phase predominantly existed 
in the porous SiC ceramics, and its fraction was around 90 %. In the case of the porous SiC 
ceramics sintered at 2150oC, 6H was major phase in porous SiC ceramics, and its fraction was 
around 80 %. This value was slightly higher than the porous SiC ceramics using the 
submicron-sized -SiC powder. Furthermore, the fractions of 4H also increased from 2 % to 15% 
as sintering temperature increased. The results suggested that the porous SiC ceramics mainly 
consisted of 6H and 4H phases. 
Kistler-De Coppi et al. investigated the phase transformation in SiC powders.15 6H phase was 
major phase in SiC powder with 0.1 wt% Al or 0.15 wt% B addition heated at 2150oC for 6 h in 
argon atmosphere. This result revealed that the formation of 6H phase would be promoted at the 
small amount of Al or B addition. The results obtained in this study also suggested that the small 
amount of Al and B additions would promote the formation of 6H phase at 2150oC. Our results 
were consistent with their results. 
                                                                                 
Porous SiC Ceramics using Coarse -SiC Powder (5.9 m) 
SEM micrograph of the SiC porous ceramics using coarse -SiC powder sintered at 2150oC 
is exhibited in Fig. 5. The porous SiC ceramics had a bulk density of 1.31 g/cm3 and an open 
porosity of 57.8 %. The volume shrinkage of the porous SiC ceramics was around 5 %. Despite 
sintering at 2150oC SiC grains did not grow and plate-like SiC grains were not observed in the 
porous SiC ceramics using the coarse -SiC powder. It seemed that sintering of the porous SiC 
Figure 4. SEM micrographs of the porous SiC ceramics using micron-sized -SiC powder 
(2.3 m) sintered at (a) 2000oC and (b) 2150oC.
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
179
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
ceramics did not proceed well, and there were many gaps among each SiC garins in the porous 
SiC ceramics. 
Table I lists fractions of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC ceramics using the coarse -SiC 
powder sintered at 2150oC. At 2150oC, 3C phase was still dominant in the SiC porous ceramics, 
and the fraction of 3C was 75 %. 
 
Table I. Fractions of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC ceramics using various -SiC powders. 
-SiC  
particle size 
Sintering 
temperature
Additives 
SiC polytypes (%) 
3C 
4H 
6H 
15R 
0.3 m 
1850oC 
Al-B-C 
89 
 1 
 4 
 5 
1950oC 
87 
 4 
 6 
 2 
2050oC 
58 
 6 
32 
 4 
2150oC 
13 
 8 
76 
 2 
No addition 
74 
 2 
15 
 9 
2.3 m 
2000oC 
Al-B-C 
88 
 2 
 7 
 3 
2150oC 
Al-B-C 
 3 
15 
81 
 1 
No addition 
76 
 2 
14 
 8 
5.9 m 
2150oC 
Al-B-C 
75 
 3 
 9 
12 
No addition 
81 
 1 
 8 
10 
 
Figure 5. SEM micrograph of the porous SiC ceramics using coarse -SiC powder (5.9 
m) sintered at 2150oC.
180
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
DISCUSSION 
 
In order to discuss the effect of Al-B-C addition to SiC on -  phase transformation of SiC 
and microstructure of porous SiC ceramics, porous SiC ceramics without Al-B-C additives were 
fabricated at 2150oC, and their microstructure and fractions of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC 
ceramics were evaluated. Figure 6 exhibits SEM micrographs of the porous SiC ceramics 
without Al-B-C additives sintered at 2150oC. In the case of submicron-sized -SiC powder, only 
a few SiC grains were grown into plate-like shape. As for the porous SiC ceramics using 
micron-sized and coarse -SiC powders, plate-like SiC grains were not grown without additives. 
Table I lists fractions of SiC polytypes in the porous SiC ceramics without Al-B-C additives. 
The fraction of 3C phase in the porous SiC ceramics without Al-B-C additives was over 70%, 
and this means that -  phase transformation and plate-like grain growth were well promoted at 
2150oC with Al-B-C addition. On the other hand, -  phase transformation did not take place in 
the porous SiC ceramics using the coarse -SiC powder, and the coarse -SiC particles did not 
grow into plate-like shapes at 2150oC in spite of Al-B-C addition. It was reported that the rate of 
Figure 6. SEM micrographs of the porous SiC ceramics using (a) Submicron-sized (0.3 m), 
(b) micron-sized (2.3 m) and (c) coarse -SiC powder (5.3 m) without Al-B-C additives 
sintered at 2150oC.  
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
181
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
-
phase transformation of SiC powder was proportional to the dimension of the specific 
surface area of the powder.15 The present result suggested that the size of plate-like SiC grains 
grown in the porous SiC ceramics depended on the starting -SiC particle size. However, the 
coarse -SiC particles did not transform into -phase easily and did not grow into the plate-like 
shape under the present sintering condition, and this result was consistent with their report. 
Furthermore, impurities in the starting SiC powders may affect the grain growth in the 
porous SiC ceramics because the amount of the additives was very small. Submicron-sized and 
coarse 
-SiC powders contain traces of iron, aluminum, and calcium as impurities, and 
micron-sized -SiC powder does not contain the metallic impurities because the -SiC powder 
was synthesized via liquid phase route. As mentioned above, only a few SiC grains were grown 
into plate-like shape in the porous SiC using submicron-sized -SiC powder without Al-B-C 
additives. At present, it has been unclear whether this grain growth occurred by the effect of 
-SiC particle size or impurities. In our future works, the effect of impurities in the starting SiC 
powders, notably the submicron-sized -SiC powder, on the grain growth in the porous SiC 
ceramics should be considered to clarify the in-situ growth mechanism in our porous SiC 
ceramics.
From the results, it is concluded that the porous SiC ceramics with a unique morphology of 
entangled large plate-like SiC grains were achieved using the micron-sized -SiC powder with 
small amount of Al and B additions at 2150oC, and the plate-like SiC grains formed in the porous 
SiC ceramics during sintering mainly corresponded to 6H. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Porous silicon carbide (SiC) ceramics were fabricated based on in-situ grain growth, and the 
effects of -SiC particle size and sintering temperature on the microstructure of the porous SiC 
ceramics were investigated. Submicron-sized (average particle size; 0.3 m), micron-sized (2.3 
m) or coarse -SiC powder (5.3 m) was uses as the starting material, and aluminum (Al), 
boron (B) and carbon (C) were added to SiC powder as sintering additives and grain growth 
promotors.  
In the case of the submicron-sized -SiC particles, grain growth was promoted and plate-like 
grains started to form at 2050oC, and the porous SiC ceramics consisted of plate-like SiC grains 
of around 10-20 m at 2150oC. Whereas SiC grains were not grown in porous SiC ceramics 
using the micron-sized -SiC particles sintered at 2000oC, large SiC grains were observed 
sintered at 2150oC. The porous SiC ceramics with a unique morphology of entangled large 
182
·
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
plate-like SiC grains of about 30-40 m in maximum were achieved using the micron-sized 
-SiC powder. XRD analysis suggested that the formation of 6H phase was promoted in the 
porous SiC ceramics using the submicron-sized or the micron-sized -SiC powder with small 
amount of Al and B additions at 2150oC, i.e. the small amount of Al and B additions would 
promote the formation of 6H phase in the porous SiC ceramics at 2150oC. In addition, the 
plate-like SiC grains mainly corresponded to 6H phase. On the other hand, 
-  phase 
transformation did not take place in the porous SiC ceramics using coarse -SiC powder, and the 
coarse -SiC particles did not grow into plate-like shapes at 2150oC in spite of Al-B-C addition. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) (21750204) from 
The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT). 
 
REFERENCES 
1H. Kaya, The Application of Ceramic-Matrix Composites to the Automotive Ceramic Gas 
Turbine, Compos. Sci. Technol., 59, 861-872 (1999). 
2F. Christin, Design, Fabrication, and Application of Thermostructural Composites (TSC) like 
C/C, C/SiC, and SiC/SiC Composites, Adv. Eng. Mater., 4, 903-912 (2002). 
3R. Naslain, SiC-Matrix Composites: Non-Brittle Ceramics for Thermo-Structural Application, 
Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2, 75-84 (2003). 
4C.P. Beesley, The Application of CMCs in High Integrity Gas Turbine Engines, Key Eng. Mater., 
127-131, 165-174 (1997). 
5L. Giancarli, G. Aiello, A. Caso, A. Gasse, G. Le Marois, Y. Poitevin, J.F. Salavy and J. 
Szczepanski, R&D Issues for SiCf/SiC Composites Structural Material Infusion Power Reactor 
Blankets, Fusion Eng. Des., 48, 509-520 (2000) . 
6R.H. Jones, SiCf/SiC Composites for Advanced Nuclear Applications, Ceram. Eng. Sci. Proc., 
24, 261-267 (2003). 
7T. Ogasawara, Recent Research Activities Regarding SiC-Based Ceramic Composites for 
Aerospace Applications, J. Plasma Fusion Res., 80, 36-41 (2004) [in Japanese]. 
8K. Ishizaki, S. Komarneni, M. Nanko, Porous Materials, Process Technology and Applications, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, the Netherlands, 1998. 
9A. Itoh, K. Shimato, T. Komori, H. Okazoe, T. Yamada, K. Niimura and Y. Watanabe, Study of 
SiC Application to Diesel Particulate Filter (Part 1): Material development, SAE Tech. Paper, 
Advances in Bioceramics and Porous Ceramics VII
·
183
Effects of SiC Particle Size and Sintering Temperature on Microstructure
No.930360 (1993). 
10K. Yoshida, Fabrication of Porous Silicon Carbide Ceramics Based on In-Situ Grain Grwoth, 
Chemical Industry (Kagaku Kogyo), 62, 672-676 (2011) [in Japanese]. 
11K. Yoshida, Development of High Performace Porous Ceramics Based on In-Situ Grain Grwoth, 
Ceramic Data Book 2011/12, 84-88 (2011) [in Japanese]. 
12Y. Zhou, H. Tanaka, S. Otani, Y. Bando, Low-Temperature Pressureless Sintering of -SiC with 
Al4C3-B4C-C Additions, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 82, 1959-1964 (1999). 
13J. J. Cao, W. J. MoberlyChan, L. L. C. De Jonghe, C. J. Gilbert and R. O. Ritchie, In Situ 
Toughened Silicon Carbide with Al-B-C Additions, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 79, 461-469 (1996). 
14J. Ruska, L.J. Gauckler, J. Lorenz and H.U. Rexer, The Quantitative Calculation of SiC 
Polytypes from Measurements of X-Ray Diffraction Peak Intensities, J. Mater. Sci., 14, 
2013-2017 (1979). 
15P.A. Kistler-De Coppi and W. Richarz, Phase Transformation and Grain Growth in Silicon 
Carbide Powders, Int. J. High Technol. Ceram., 2, 99-113 (1986). 
Ahmed, Y. M. Z., 3
Arnold, R., 25
Atkinson, A., 111 
Bal, B. S., 65
Bianchi, G., 151
Chen, H., 25
Chen, Z., 111
El-Sheikh, S. M., 3
Fertig III, R. S., 129
Gao, T., 141
Gianella, S., 151 
Giuliani, F., 111
Gu, Y., 53
Gustavsen, A., 141
Hayakawa, S., 33
He, J., 141
Huang, W., 53
Jelle, B. P., 141
Ko, C.-C., 25
Lee, D.-J., 25
Liu, Y., 65
185
Nakamura, Y., 33
Nickerson, S., 129
Ogunwumi, S., 165
Ortona, A., 151
Osaka, A., 33
Quinn, G. D., 39 
Rahaman, M. N., 53, 65
Rezaei, E., 151
Sarma, H., 165
See, C.-C., 173
Shirosaki, Y., 33
Stamboulis, A., 33
Tas, A. C., 81, 93
Xiao, W., 65
Yano, T., 173
Yokoyama, S., 173
Yoshida, K., 173
Yoshihara, H., 33
Zaki, Z. I., 3 
Zhang, H., 25
Author Index
