# Design and materials issues for high performan

Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
Design and material issues for high performance
SiCf/SiC-based fusion power cores
A.R. Raffray a,*, R. Jones b, G. Aiello c, M. Billone d, L. Giancarli c,
H. Golﬁer c, A. Hasegawa e, Y. Katoh f, A. Kohyama f, S. Nishio g,
B. Riccardi h, M.S. Tillack a
a Room 458, FERP, EBU-II, Uniersity of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drie, La Jolla, CA 92093-0417, USA
b Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, P.O. Box 999, MSIN P8-15, Richland, WA 99352, USA
c CEA, Centre d’Etudes de Saclay, DRN/DMT/SERMA/LCA-Bat. 470, F-91191 Gif sur Yette Cedex, France
d Building 212, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Aenue, Argonne, IL 60439, USA
e Department of Quantum Science and Energy Engineering, Tohoku Uniersity, Aramki-Aza-Aoba, Aoba-ku,
Sendai 980-8579, Japan
f Institute of Adanced Energy, Kyoto Uniersity, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan
g Department of Fusion Plasma Research, Naka Fusion Research Establishment, JAERI,
801-1 Mukouyama Naka-machi Naka-gun Ibaraki-kenn 311-0193, Japan
h ENEA-CR Frascati, ia E. Fermi, 27, I-00044 Frascati, Rome, Italy
Accepted 27 February 2001
Abstract
The SiCf/SiC composite is a promising structural material candidate for fusion power cores and has been
considered internationally in several power plant studies. It offers safety advantages arising from its low induced
radioactivity and afterheat, and the possibility of high performance through high temperature operation. However, its
behavior and performance at high temperatures and under irradiation are still not well known and need to be better
characterized. This paper summarizes the current SiCf/SiC design and R&D status. The latest SiCf/SiC-based power
core design studies are summarized, and the key SiCf/SiC parameters affecting the performance of power core
components are highlighted. The current status of the material R&D is discussed, with the focus on fabrication and
joining, baseline properties and properties under irradiation, as well as the desirable evolution of these properties. In
the light of this, the R&D plans are summarized and assessed. Finally, to help present-day design studies and in the
expectation of future conﬁrmatory R&D results, recommendations are provided on SiCf/SiC parameters and
properties to be assumed for present design analysis of long term SiCf/SiC-based power plants. © 2001 Elsevier
Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Silicon carbide composites; Fusion power cores; Design; Material issues
www.elsevier.com/locate/fusengdes
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-619-534-9720; fax: +1-619-534-7716.
E-mail address: raffray@fusion.ucsd.edu (A.R. Raffray).
0920-3796/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0920-3796(01)00181-8
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
56
1. Introduction
The use of the SiCf/SiC composite as structural
material in a fusion reactor can be viewed as a
high-risk high-payoff endeavor. The high payoff
is linked to the superior safety characteristics of
SiC arising from its low induced radioactivity and
afterheat, and to the possibility of high perfor-
mance through high temperature operation. The
high risk is associated mainly with the uncertainty
about SiCf/SiC behavior and performance at high
temperatures and under irradiation.
SiCf/SiC was considered several years ago in
the
ARIES-I
[1],
ARIES-IV
[2]
and
PROMETHEUS [3] power plant studies in the
US and more recently in other international stud-
ies, in particular the TAURO [4] and the He-
cooled pebble bed blanket [5] design studies in the
EU, the DREAM [6] reactor study in Japan, and
the ARIES-AT [7] study in the US. Several issues
have been identiﬁed for SiCf/SiC, including the
cost of fabrication, joining methods, and factors
limiting the range of operation. The major issues
appear to be the rather low thermal conductivity
at high temperatures and under irradiation, and
the maximum allowable operating temperature.
Over the past several years an international
R&D effort has helped address and better under-
stand some of these issues. This paper aims to
assess the current design and R&D status. First,
SiC application in fusion power plants is summa-
rized. Example of the latest fusion power core
design concepts utilizing SiCf/SiC composites in
the EU, Japan and the US are then brieﬂy de-
scribed and the key SiCf/SiC issues inﬂuencing
their performance are discussed. Next, the current
status of the material R&D including fabrication
and joining, baseline properties and properties
under irradiation is described and the extent to
which these provide information to help resolve
the design issues is assessed. The desirable evolu-
tion of SiCf/SiC parameters and properties is dis-
cussed with the aim of increasing the performance
and attractiveness of SiCf/SiC-based fusion power
plant designs. Finally, future R&D plans are
outlined.
2. Design concepts
2.1. Use of SiCf/SiC in fusion power plants
Silicon carbide is a refractory semiconductor
with unique properties. Because of its thermal,
mechanical and chemical stabilities, it can be used
in extremely harsh environments. Pure SiC also
provides exceptionally low radioactivity under 14-
MeV neutron radiation, making it one of the top
candidates for use in fusion power cores.
Due to its brittle nature, SiC often has been
considered in a ﬁber-reinforced ceramic matrix
composite form. This enables its use as a struc-
tural and/or pressure vessel material subjected to
high thermal and pressure stresses. For example,
SiCf/SiC can be fabricated with sufﬁcient thermal
conductivity to serve as a ﬁrst wall under reason-
able heat loads (up to ‰ 1 MW/m2). Contain-
ment of coolants at high pressure, especially
helium, is a concern. However, various techniques
are available to coat or impregnate surfaces to
provide hermeticity.
Behind the ﬁrst structural wall, SiC can provide
other attractive features. Its strength and chemical
stability at high temperatures enables very high
coolant outlet temperatures, providing the possi-
bility of very high thermal conversion efﬁciency.
By using SiC within the pressure boundary, in-
stead of as the pressure boundary, its high tem-
perature capability can be fully exploited. For
example, blanket designs have been considered in
which low-conductivity SiC is used as a thermal
insulator to allow the pressure vessel to remain at
a lower temperature than the coolant outlet.
If SiC is used to contain the main coolant
within the power core, especially if the coolant
temperature is raised to extremely high values,
then SiC is probably needed in the entire primary
cooling circuit. SiC pipes can be manufactured at
reasonable cost; however, high-performance heat
exchangers made from SiC may be complex and
expensive.
SiC has some other interesting speciality uses
for some blanket concepts. With its modest elec-
trical conductivity (of the order of 500  m−1,
and probably lower for composites because of the
ﬁber/matrix interfaces), SiC can be used with
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
57
some liquid metals to reduce the MHD body force.
For example, it has been proposed as a ‘ﬂow insert’
for this purpose. SiC also has very low hydrogen
permeability, making it a candidate for tritium
permeation barriers.
In regions of very high heat ﬂux, such as a
tokamak divertor, SiC is not particularly well-
suited. If a separate plasma-facing armor material
is needed, then issues related to so-called ‘duplex
structures’ arise. Bonding methods exist, but spe-
cial care must be taken. One especially attractive
duplex system is SiC with tungsten, since both share
similar thermal expansion coefﬁcients and both can
operate at very high temperatures.
While there are many potential applications of
SiC and SiCf/SiC composites in fusion power plant
designs, special attention is given in this article to
‘high performance’ applications in a fusion power
core that place the most severe requirements on the
material. Designs studies are useful tools to deﬁne
which parameters are most critical in order to
establish the feasibility and to fully exploit the
advantages of SiC/SiC composites for such applica-
tions. The requirements on the materials can be
established through detailed analysis of the ther-
mal, mechanical and nuclear performances of spe-
ciﬁc design concepts. As highlighted in the latest
design studies summarized below, the parameters
that emerge as the most important for the success
of a SiCf/SiC-based power core include:
 thermal conductivity of the SiCf/SiC composite
at high temperatures and under irradiation;
 the maximum SiCf/SiC temperature limit under
irradiation;
 the maximum Pb–17Li/SiC interface tempera-
ture under ﬂowing conditions, including the
effect of irradiation, if any;
 maximum stress limits to be used for SiCf/SiC;
 fabrication and joining (brazing) of SiCf/SiC
and bonding of W to SiCf/SiC, including meth-
ods
and
constraints
such
as
minimum
thickness;
 lifetime.
2.2. TAURO breeder blanket concept
The TAURO blanket is a self-cooled Pb–17Li
blanket using SiCf/SiC structures [8]. It has been
developed with the objective of reaching passive
safety in tokamak-type Fusion Power Reactors.
The TAURO design minimizes the energy available
in the vacuum vessel in order to avoid breaking of
the conﬁnement, which would lead to the release of
radioactive materials to the environment. This
requirement leads to the use of low-pressure ﬂuids
with low reactivity and low afterheat levels. Liquid
metal coolants appear to be the best choice, espe-
cially the eutectic Pb–17Li.
The TAURO blanket offers the capability of
heat extraction at high coolant temperatures and
promises favorable conversion efﬁciencies. Re-
cently performed thermo-mechanical analyses have
shown that the blanket could withstand a surface
heat ﬂux of 0.7 MW/m2. In the reference design,
which assumes a surface heat ﬂux of 0.5 MW/m2,
Pb–17Li inlet/outlet temperatures are, respectively,
450 and 860°C and the estimated efﬁciency is
approximately 47%. The possibility of assuming a
higher thermal conductivity than the 15 W/m K
originally used in the analysis implies increases of
both the surface heat ﬂux and the conversion cycle
efﬁciency without exceeding the maximum temper-
ature and the stress limits for SiCf/SiC.
The conﬁguration and the performance of the
TAURO blanket design are described below, along
with a discussion on the improvements required in
the characteristics of present-day SiCf/SiC com-
posites, in particular its thermal conductivity, neu-
tron irradiation resistance and compatibility with
Pb–17Li at high temperature [9,10].
2.2.1. Speciﬁcations and design description
The design is based on the speciﬁcations for the
SEAFP study [11], i.e. fusion power of 3000 MW,
neutron wall load of 2 MW/m2 and surface heat
ﬂux of 0.5 MW/m2. The TAURO blanket is essen-
tially formed by a SiCf/SiC box with an indirectly-
cooled ﬁrst wall, which acts as a container for the
Pb–17Li. The Pb–17Li acts as a coolant, a breeder
multiplier material, and a tritium carrier. Each
outboard segment is poloidally divided into several
straight modules, attached on one common thick
back-plate. The number of modules cooled in series
depends on the assumption on inlet and outlet
Pb–17Li temperatures. The feeding pipes are lo-
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
58
cated behind the module. The coolant enters the
inlet collector through a single tube and is di-
vided into ﬁve sub-ﬂows, one for each sub-mod-
ule (see Fig. 1). Within each submodule the
Pb–17Li ﬂows at ﬁrst poloidally downward in a
thin channel located just behind the ﬁrst wall,
makes a U-turn at the bottom into a second
channel and ﬂows up, then down into the outlet
collector. Toroidal plates (stiffeners) are required
for reinforcing the sub-module box against the
hydrostatic pressure (assumed to be 1.5 MPa in
all calculations) and act as ﬂow separators [12].
2.2.2. Design criteria and models
The design optimization and structural assess-
ment of the TAURO blanket were performed in
3D, assuming square meshes and an orthotropic
model for SiCf/SiC. Due account was taken of
the poloidal variations in heat transfer, coolant
conditions, mechanical loads and thermal loads.
Conduction remains the dominant heat transfer
mechanism; the thermal conductivity of SiCf/SiC
was assumed to be 15 W/m K in all directions.
The other assumed SiCf/SiC characteristics were
those of the industrial Cerasep® N3-1 [9].
The TAURO design criteria [13], discussed in
Section 3.3, have been applied. The assumed
limits are the following:
 the tensile and compressive stresses in plane are
limited to 145 and 580 MPa, respectively;
 the tensile and compressive stresses through the
thickness are limited to 110 and 420 MPa,
respectively;
 the shear stresses through the thickness are
limited to 45 MPa.
These limits have been determined using experi-
mental results obtained several years ago on
Cerasep® N2-1 and are, therefore, probably too
pessimistic when applied to present-day SiCf/SiC
or to future improved composites.
The following constraints have also been used:
 the maximum SiCf/SiC temperature 1300°C
(expected for future composites based on Hi-
Nicalon ﬁbers);
 the average coolant outlet temperature

850°C to achieve a conversion efﬁciency 
45%.
The maximum SiCf/SiC temperature could be
lower due to the void swelling regime, but no data
are available to determine the temperature transi-
tion from the dislocation loop to the void swelling
regime.
The
maximum
temperature
may
be
around 1000°C because of this transition.
2.2.3. Neutronic analysis
A 2D neutronic analysis of the TAURO blan-
ket has been performed with the Monte-Carlo
code TRIPOLI4 using the ENDBF-VI transport
cross section library. The adopted model repro-
duces half sector of the blanket geometry at the
equatorial plane. It results in a TBR of 1.37 is
Fig. 1. Outboard module of the TAURO blanket design.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
59
Table 1
Cerasep® N3-1 main characteristics
Measured value
Temp. (°C)
Property
Value assumed for the
analyses
(SEP data)
Density (g/cm3)
20
2.4
2.5
102
20
10
Porosity (%)
40
Fiber content (%)
40
20
0.8–6
–
6–10
Thickness (mm)
(30020)
Tensile stress (in plane) (MPa)
–
20
0.800.25
20
–
Tensile strain (%)
20
Trans-laminar shear stress (MPa)
20020
–
20
Inter-laminar shear stress (MPa)
44
44
20020
20
200
Young’s modulus (in plane) (GPa)
20
Young’s modulus (through thickness) (GPa)
–
200 a
–
20
80 b
Shear modulus (in plane) (GPa)
–
Shear modulus (through thickness) (GPa)
50 b
20
–
20
0.18 b
Poisson’s ratio (in plane)
20
Poisson’s ratio (through thickness)
–
0.18 a,b
15
1000
15
Thermal conductivity (in plane) (W/m K)
20
Thermal conductivity (through thickness) (W/m K)
132
15
800
7.6
15
7.5
1000
15
20
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient (in plane) ×10−6 K−1
4
4
20
–
2.5 b
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient (through thickness) ×10−6
K−1
a Value not available; same value has been assumed for in-plane and through thicknesses.
b Corresponding value for the 2D composite.
obtained with 90% enrichment. A rough 3D es-
timation would give a TBR of 1.17. Also, a
detailed distribution of the power density depo-
sition has been obtained that will serve as a
source in the thermo-mechanical calculations.
2.2.4. Thermo-mechanical analyses
This section summarizes the main results of
the recent thermo-mechanical analyses, which
focused on the outboard blanket in the mid-
plane region where the thermal conditions are
the most severe. The analyses were performed
with CASTEM2000 [14,15] using the properties of
Cerasep® N3-1 shown in Table 1. The evaluated
maximum surface heat ﬂux has been assumed
along the whole sub-module height. The results
are obtained by using a non-linear mechanical
model that simulates the non-linear stress–strain
relation and the TAURO design criteria pre-
sented in Section 3.4. The Von Mises stress is
also
reported
for
comparison
with
previous
analyses.
Assuming two modules cooled in series, a sur-
face heat ﬂux of 0.5 MW/m2, an inlet tempera-
ture of 750°C, a Pb–17Li velocity in the ﬁrst
layer of 1.3 m/s, a ﬁrst wall thickness of 6 mm,
a module width of 0.3 m and a module height
of 2 m, the coolant outlet temperature is around
860°C. The highest stresses appear on the ﬁrst
wall. The TAURO criterion for plane stresses is
0.93 (below the limit of 1), the maximum nor-
mal stress through the ﬁrst wall thickness is 63
MPa, and the maximum shear stress is 30 MPa.
The maximum tensile stress in plane (evaluated
with the Von Mises criterion) is 125 MPa. The
module expands about 3 mm in the poloidal
direction. The maximum SiCf/SiC temperature is
about 1050°C.
2.2.5. TAURO blanket thermo-mechanical limits
An estimation has been performed of the
TAURO blanket performance with higher sur-
face heat ﬂux and correspondingly higher neu-
tron wall load. Increased power densities are
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
60
Fig. 2. Maximum temperature in the TAURO ﬁrst wall as a function of surface heat ﬂux for different ﬁrst wall thicknesses, . The
Pb–17Li temperature rise as a function of surface heat ﬂux is also shown. (Module height, width=2, 0.3 m; Pb–17Li inlet
temperature, pressure, velocity=750°C, 1.5 MPa, 1.3 m/s; SiCf/SiC thermal conductivity=15 W/m K).
expected to yield reduced electricity costs and a
more economically attractive power reactor. Figs.
2 and 3 show the evolution of maximum tempera-
ture and stress as the power deposition increases.
For a module height of 2 m, a ﬁrst wall thickness
of 6 mm, and an inlet temperature of 750°C, the
maximum temperature design limit is reached at
0.69 MW/m2, corresponding to a neutron wall load
of 2.8 MW/m2. The maximum tensile stress in plane
in the ﬁrst wall is reached at a surface heat ﬂux of
0.80 MW/m2.
The reduction of the ﬁrst wall thickness, and of
the module height promote higher surface heat ﬂux
and a neutron wall load of 3–4 MW/m2 can be
envisaged (see Table 2). This evaluation gives an
idea of the sensitivity of the design to possible
improvements of the calculation models and/or to
an increase of the acceptable stress limits. For the
TAURO blanket, the coolant temperature does not
affect the stress limit when increasing the surface
heat ﬂux. This suggests that, under the conditions
considered here, high power densities are, in prin-
ciple, favorable for higher conversion efﬁciencies
[4].
2.2.6. Impact of thermal conductiity
The thermal conductivity is the major issue for
this structural material because it affects the blan-
ket temperature distribution (maximum SiCf/SiC
temperature and outlet Pb–17Li temperature), and
the cycle efﬁciency. If the transverse thermal con-
ductivity is increased to 20 W/m K, the maximum
acceptable surface heat ﬂux for the TAURO blan-
ket would increase by approximately 12%. The
increased demand for improvement of the SiCf/SiC
characteristics suggests that a value of the surface
heat ﬂux of 0.7–0.8 MW/m2 is probably a compro-
mise. On the other hand, a higher thermal conduc-
tivity promotes the heat exchange between the ﬁrst
wall and the Pb–17Li, and reduces the maximum
SiCf/SiC temperature. The double consequences
are the possibility to increase the height of the
Fig. 3. Maximum stress in the TAURO ﬁrst wall as a function
of surface heat ﬂux for different ﬁrst wall thicknesses, .
(Module height, width=2, 0.3 m; Pb–17Li inlet temperature,
pressure, velocity=750°C, 1.5 MPa, 1.3 m/s; SiCf/SiC thermal
conductivity=15 W/m K).
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
61
Table 2
Performances of the TAURO blanket for different module lengths and ﬁrst wall thicknessesa
2
Module length (m)
1
2
1
3
6
6
3
First wall thickness (mm)
0.8
Maximum allowable surface heat ﬂux based on stress limit (MW/m2)
0.98
0.82
1.01
0.69
Maximum allowable surface heat ﬂux based on temperature limit (MW/m2)
0.98
0.8
1.0
3.9
3.2
2.8
4.0
Corresponding neutron wall load (MW/m2)
a With Pb–17Li inlet temperature, pressure and velocity of 750°C, 1.5 MPa and 1.3 m/s, respectively.
module and the outlet temperature of the Pb–
17Li within the stress limits for SiCf/SiC. An
extreme case — assuming a thermal conductivity
of 20 W/m K, a thickness of 6 mm, and a height
of 3 m — has showed the possibility to increase
the outlet temperature up to 940°C without ex-
ceeding the maximum temperature and the stress
limits for SiCf/SiC. The conversion efﬁciency
could be increased correspondingly to 50%.
2.2.7. External circuits and components
The TAURO blanket could be associated with
an external primary circuit for power conversion
and tritium recovery. The primary circuit consists
of several parallel circuits, each of them conveying
about 600 MW of thermal power. Its principal
components are a heat exchanger, a tritium ex-
traction unit and, of course, a Pb–17Li pump.
The tritium extraction unit could be a gas/Pb–
17Li contactor in a by-pass conﬁguration, com-
mon for all the Pb–17Li circuits and treating a
relatively small Pb–17Li ﬂow-rate (depending on
the tolerable tritium concentration in the Pb–
17Li).
At present, a Brayton cycle using helium is
foreseen for power conversion, which eliminates
the potential risk of Pb–17Li/water interaction
although it requires Pb–17Li/helium heat ex-
changers, the technology for which is yet to be
developed [15,16]. The helium pressure should be
high to minimize pressure drop and component
sizes. A rupture disk in the Pb–17Li circuit close
to the heat exchanger and a discharge vessel will
be required to protect the blanket from accidental
pressurization in case of heat exchanger failure.
When assuming TAURO coolant inlet/outlet tem-
peratures of 450/860°C, the power conversion efﬁ-
ciency would theoretically attain 60%. However,
when including the estimated loss due to the
various components, the conversion efﬁciency is
47%.
Such a conversion efﬁciency could be increased
up to 50% if the Pb–17Li inlet temperature is
increased to 650°C or the outlet temperature to
1000°C. Therefore, the precise determination of
the global blanket system efﬁciency depends on an
optimization between blanket module arrange-
ment, pressure drop, Pb–17Li heat-up and power
conversion.
2.3. DREAM power core
Much of the difﬁculty associated with the
maintenance of tokamak systems arises from the
conﬁguration complexity and material radioactiv-
ity. The DREAM (DRastically EAsy Mainte-
nance) power plant has been conceived to mitigate
this difﬁculty by considering a torus conﬁguration
with a high aspect ratio of 8 and a low-activation
structural material (SiCf/SiC composite) [6,17–
19]. The torus system is divided radially into equal
sectors and each sector forms an assembling unit.
All the piping and feeder systems are extracted to
the spacious torus central region. The maximum
toroidal ﬁeld strength of 20 T and the plasma
major and minor radii of 16 and 2 m lead to a
high fusion power of 5.5 GW under moderate
physical constraints such as a non-reversed shear
proﬁle with a MHD safety factor of 3, a Troyon
factor of 3 for the beta limit and an energy
conﬁnement time enhancement factor of 2. The
average neutron wall load is 2.5 MW/m2. Surface
heat loads on the blanket ﬁrst wall and the diver-
tor plate are estimated to be about 0.5 and 5
MW/m2, respectively.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
62
The power core is divided into 16 sectors cor-
responding to the l6 TF coils. Each sector has
its own horizontal maintenance port, allowing
replacement of the entire sector without opening
the cryostat or disassembling other components
such as the coil system. Details of the mainte-
nance procedure can be found in Refs. [6,17–
19].
2.3.1. Blanket system
2.3.1.1. Blanket module conﬁguration. Each blan-
ket sector is divided into 16 sub-sectors (rings)
in the toroidal direction. The blanket modules
are connected by bolts to the cooling rings,
which also function as support structures. The
toroidal dimension of the blanket modules is
kept under 500 mm based on considerations of
fabricability and maintainability. Their poloidal
and radial dimensions are 500 and 650 mm, re-
spectively.
A typical blanket module is shown in Fig. 4.
It consists of a ﬁrst wall zone, a tritium breed-
ing zone and a high-temperature shielding zone.
The wall of the module has cooling paths in it.
Neutron multiplier material (Be), tritium breed-
ing material (Li2O or other lithium ceramics)
and shielding material (SiC) are packed in the
module as small size pebbles of diameter 1 mm
for Be and Li2O, and 10 mm for SiC. The He
coolant supplied from the inlet pipe of the cool-
ing ring ﬁrst ﬂows through the side wall and
ﬁrst wall channels. It then ﬂows into the module
through the porous partition wall and cools the
blanket internals before exiting through the out-
let pipe of the ring. The ﬁrst wall region is a
15-mm thick double wall structure consisting of
a 4-mm plasma side wall and an 8-mm inner
wall between which are located 3 mm×10 mm
rectangular cooling channels.
The blanket module is fabricated by the unit-
forming method, which is illustrated in Fig. 5
and described in more detail in Refs. [6,17–19].
The SiCf/SiC composite must be treated to get a
high density. There are two methods to form a
ceramic matrix directly from gaseous raw mate-
rials:
chemical
vapor
deposition
(CVD)
and
chemical vapor inﬁltration (CVI). The CVI pro-
cess is assumed here based on its advantages of
no pressurization, close adherence between ﬁber
and matrix, and possibility of complex shaping,
although it is recognized that there is less expe-
rience in applying this process and that its treat-
ment time is longer.
2.3.1.2. Blanket analysis. A thermo-mechanical
analysis of the SiCf/SiC ﬁrst wall during normal
operation was performed based on the following
parameters:
nuclear heating rate: 16.5 MW/m3
surface heat load: 0.5 MW/m2
heat transfer coefﬁcient: 6000 W/m2 K
blanket He inlet and outlet temperatures: 600
and 900°C
ﬁrst wall He average temperature: 700°C
coolant pressure: 10 MPa
The properties of the SiCf/SiC composite used
in the analysis are summarized in Table 3. In the
absence of conﬁrmed thermal conductivity values
of high quality SiCf/SiC under irradiation, two
values were assumed in the analysis: 15 W/m K as
a reference case and 60 W/m K as an optimistic
one. The temperature proﬁles and stress distribu-
tions in the ﬁrst wall are shown in Fig. 6(A) and
(B) for thermal conductivities of 15 and 60 W/
Fig. 4. Schematic of DREAM blanket module (pebble diame-
ter () dimension in mm).
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
63
Fig. 5. Manufacturing process of DREAM blanket module.
m K, respectively. The corresponding maximum
temperatures are 954 and 823°C, which are lower
than the operating temperature limit (1100°C)
assumed in this study. The stress distributions are
shown as the Tresca stresses due to the internal
pressure (10 MPa) and the temperature gradients.
The maximum values are 137 and 75.4 MPa for
thermal conductivities of 15 and 60 W/m K, re-
spectively. These values are also well below the
allowable stress limit (200 MPa) assumed in this
study.
The pressure drop in the pebble bed blanket
region was estimated using Ergun’s equation and
the ﬁlm temperature difference between the he-
lium coolant and the Li2O pebbles was estimated
by Shirai’s equation [6,17–19]. Connecting more
than one blanket module in series results in a
higher He velocity and somewhat better heat
transfer. However, the corresponding pressure
drop becomes unacceptably high and fully parallel
ﬂow between blanket modules was selected for the
design. The following limits were used to select
the design parameters: the maximum SiCf/SiC
temperature at the plasma side Ta1100°C, the
maximum temperature of the breeder pebble
Tb1000°C and the net thermal efﬁciency 
45%. The design window under the reference de-
sign parameters is shown in Fig. 7.
2.3.2. Diertor system
2.3.2.1. Diertor conﬁguration. The divertor sys-
tem consists of two principal parts: the target
plates and the structures. The target plates include
three pieces: inner, outer and ‘dome’ plates. The
plasma ﬂows through the scrape-off layer and
enters the divertor where enhanced line radiation
from injected neon impurity allows much of the
power to be distributed along the plates and also
Table 3
Material
properties
of
SiCf/SiC
composite
assumed
for
DREAM design and analysis (including neutron irradiation
effects)
Parameter
Speciﬁcation
Thermal conductivity
Reference case
15 W/m-K
Optimistic case
60 W/m-K
Speciﬁc heat
1200 J/kg-K
Density
2500 kg/m3
200 GPa
Young’s modulus
0.2
Poisson’s ratio
300 MPa
Tensile strength
200 MPa
Allowable stress (=2/3×ultimate
strength)
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient
3.3×10−6 K−1
1100°C
Maximum allowable temperature
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
64
Fig. 6. Temperature proﬁles and stress distributions in DREAM blanket ﬁrst W wall for SiCf/SiC thermal conductivities of: (A) 15
W/m K; and (B) 60 W/m K.
partially redirected out to the ﬁrst wall. A perme-
ation wall is provided to prevent a back ﬂow of
neutral gas and impurity into the main plasma. It
also promotes recycling of neutral particles. The
dome is installed near the X-point along the
scrape-off-layer (SOL). It prevents impurity parti-
cles generated at the divertor plate from invading
the X-point zone. The bafﬂe plate is provided at
the inlet of the divertor area, i.e. below the blan-
ket. It prevents a backﬂow of neutral particles
into the main plasma. The bafﬂe plate surface is
coated with 2-mm thick tungsten (W) and the
divertor plate surface with 2-mm thick CVD-SiC.
Fig. 8 shows the overall divertor conﬁguration.
The major design parameters of the divertor
system are listed in Table 4. The He coolant is fed
through a double-walled pipe. Comb-shaped ex-
haust ports are installed, facing the inner and
outer strike points and work as the permeation
wall. Coolant paths are provided in the teeth of
the comb. The surface of the divertor plates is
coated with 2-mm thick tungsten for the bafﬂe
plate and with 2-mm thick CVD-SiC for the
divertor. Small 3 mm×3 mm coolant channels
are provided at the front to accommodate the
surface heat ﬂux. Larger channels are used at the
back where the heat load is lower in order to
Fig. 7. Design window for DREAM blanket ﬁrst wall.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
65
Fig. 8. DREAM divertor conﬁguration.
1100°C for a divertor surface heat ﬂux of 3
MW/m2 and an average helium coolant tempera-
ture of 700°C. This led to the selection of a
coolant velocity of 110 m/s. The corresponding
pressure drop is about 300 kPa/m, which results
in a total pressure drop in the divertor system of
1 MPa.
A thermo-mechanical analysis of the divertor
plate during under normal operation was per-
formed for the following operating conditions:
nuclear heating rate: 10 MW/m3 for SiCf/SiC
and 20 MW/m3 for W
surface heat ﬂux: 3 and 5 MW/m2
coolant temperature: 700°C
heat transfer coefﬁcient: 10 kW/m2 K
coolant pressure: 10 MPa
The properties of the SiCf/SiC composite used
in this calculation are listed in Table 4. The
optimistic thermal conductivity value of 60 W/m-
K was assumed for the SiCf/SiC. For the 2-mm
W armor zone, the following properties were
used, considering the reduced self-binding force
due to castellation:
thermal conductivity: 121 W/m K
Young’s modulus: 100 GPa
Poisson’s ratio: 0.2
thermal expansion coefﬁcient: 3.3×10−6 K−1
The temperature proﬁles and the stress distri-
butions in the divertor plate are shown in Fig.
9(A) and (B) for surface heat ﬂuxes of 3 and 5
W/m2, respectively. The corresponding maximum
W temperatures are 1061 and 1297°C, respec-
tively. The corresponding maximum stresses at
the W and SiCf/SiC interface are 152.4 and 251.7
MPa, respectively. In spite of the optimistic ther-
mal conductivity value of 60 W/m K assumed for
SiCf/SiC, both the SiCf/SiC maximum tempera-
ture and the stress for the 5 MW/m2 case exceed
the allowable values of 1100°C and 200 MPa,
respectively. If a thermal conductivity of 15 W/
m K is assumed, the surface heat ﬂux is limited
to 1 MW/m2 in order to accommodate those
limits. Thus, within the currently attainable mate-
rial performance of the SiCf/SiC composite, it is
very difﬁcult to ﬁnd an engineering solution satis-
fying the material limits. The choice is clear for
the
use
of
SiCf/SiC
in
this
case:
either
to
minimize the pressure losses. The divertor He
inlet/outlet temperatures are 600/800°C to main-
tain the maximum SiC temperature 1100°C.
The coolant is then directed to the high-tempera-
ture shield, where its temperature is raised to
900°C.
3.2.2. Analysis of diertor plate. A heat transfer
coefﬁcient of 10 kW/m2 K is required to maintain
the 2-mm thick SiC wall maximum temperature
Table 4
Major speciﬁcations of DREAM divertor system
Design parameters
Items
Type
Slot-type gaseous divertor
Max. surface heat load:
Reference case
5 MW/m2
Optimistic case
3 MW/m2
Incident particle energy
30 eV
SiCf/SiC composite
Structural material
Thermal conductivity
60 W/m K
200 MPa
Allowable stress
Surface coating material:
Divertor plate
CVD SiC
Bafﬂe plate
CVD/LPS W
Coating thickness
2 mm
Coolant:
Helium gas
Pressure
10 MPa
Inlet/Outlet temperature
600/800°C
(Reheated in the high temp.
shield to 800°C)
Maximum coolant velocity
110 m/s
1 MPa
Total pressure loss
1100°C
Maximum wall temperature
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
66
Fig. 9. Temperature proﬁles and stress distributions in DREAM divertor plasma-facing wall for surface heat ﬂuxes of: (A) 3
MW/m2; and (B) 5 MW/m2.
develop materials having a much higher perfor-
mance or to reduce the divertor load require-
ments.
2.3.2.3. Sputtering erosion. An analysis of diver-
tor sputtering erosion was done. Details of the
analysis and of its basis can be found in Refs.
[6,17–23]. Here, a summary of the major results
and observations is provided.
1. The sputtering threshold energy of SiC is
about 25 eV. It is not necessary to consider
self-sputtering because the threshold energy of
self-sputtering is large and the self-sputtering
yield for a low-Z material does not exceed
unity. The analysis results indicate that the
erosion rate of SiC increases rapidly when the
incident particle energy exceeds 30 eV, and a
practical design is not possible.
2. The threshold energy for W is higher than 145
eV but self-sputtering may be critical as the
threshold energy for W self-sputtering is low,
90 eV, and the self-sputtering yield for a high-
Z material exceeds unity. The analysis results
conﬁrm this, showing very small sputtering
erosion of W by D, T and He up to 200 eV.
Self-sputtering is the critical limiting condition
(89 eV) in this case.
In the DREAM design, the following divertor
wall design was adopted based on the above
observations:
incident
particle
energy,
Ei30
eV:
SiC
coated wall
incident particle energy, 30 eVEi89 eV:
SiC wall coated with W
incident particle energy, Ei89 eV: no practi-
cal design solution found
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
67
Though the divertor plasma conditions are not
sufﬁciently clear in the current DREAM design it
is assumed that the incident particle energy does
not exceed the threshold energy of SiC at the
divertor plate, and does not exceed the threshold
energy of W at the bafﬂe plate.
2.4. ARIES-AT
The ARIES-AT power core (shown in Fig. 10)
has been developed with the overall objective of
achieving high performance while maintaining at-
tractive safety features, simple design geometry,
credible maintenance and fabrication processes,
and reasonable design margins as indications of
reliability [7,24]. The design is based on Pb–17Li
as breeder and coolant and a SiCf/SiC composite
as structural material. The Pb–17Li ﬁrst ﬂows
through the divertor, which is designed to accom-
modate a 5 MW/m2 peak heat ﬂux, and then
through the blanket. To minimize waste and to
decrease the cost, the blanket is subdivided radi-
ally into two regions: a replaceable ﬁrst zone (in
the inboard and outboard) and a life-of-plant
second zone (in the outboard).
2.4.1. Power cycle
The Brayton cycle offers the best near-term
possibility of power conversion with high efﬁ-
ciency. It is chosen to maximize the potential gain
from high temperature operation of the Pb–17Li,
which after exiting the blanket is routed through a
heat exchanger with He as secondary ﬂuid [25].
The Brayton cycle considered is shown in Fig. 11.
It includes three-stage compression with two in-
tercoolers and a high efﬁciency recuperator. Its
main parameters are set under the assumption of
state of the art components and/or with modest
and reasonable extrapolation and are as follows:
 lowest
He
temperature
in
the
cycle
(heat
sink)=35°C
 turbine efﬁciency=93%
 compressor efﬁciency=90%
 recuperator effectiveness=96%
 He fractional pressure drop in out-of-vessel
cycle=0.025
The maximum He cycle temperature is 1050°C,
resulting in a high cycle efﬁciency of about 58.5%.
2.4.2. Blanket
As illustrated in Figs. 12 and 13, the blanket
design is modular and consists of a simple annular
box through which the Pb–17Li ﬂows in two
poloidal passes. The ﬁrst pass is a high-velocity
ﬂow through the annular channel region keeping
the box walls cooled. The coolant then turns and
ﬂows very slowly as a second pass through the
large inner channel from which the Pb–17Li exits
at a high temperature. This ﬂow scheme enables
operating Pb–17Li at a high outlet temperature
(1100°C) while maintaining the SiCf/SiC com-
posite and the SiC/PbLi interface at a lower tem-
perature (about 1000°C).
The SiCf/SiC parameters and properties used in
the analysis are consistent with the suggestion
from the January 2000 International Town Meet-
ing on SiCf/SiC Design and Material Issues for
Fusion Systems [26] and are summarized in Table
5. Even though the SiCf/SiC provides for insulat-
ing the walls, thereby minimizing MHD effects,
Fig. 10. ARIES-AT power core (radial dimension in m).
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
68
Fig. 11. Brayton cycle assumed for ARIES-AT power plant.
the
thermal
analysis
conservatively
assumes
MHD-laminared ﬂow of Pb–17Li in the blanket
and heat transfer by conduction only.
The temperature proﬁle through the blanket
has been estimated by a 2D moving coordinate
analysis following the Pb–17Li ﬂow through the
ﬁrst-pass annular wall channel and then through
the second-pass large inner channel. The annular
wall rib spacing is used as MHD ﬂow control to
promote a higher ﬂow rate through the ﬁrst wall
(with larger toroidal spacing) than through the
side and back wall. For example, for the ﬁrst
outboard blanket region shown in Fig. 12, having
three channels in the ﬁrst wall and 13 in the back
wall allows for a high velocity of 4.2 m/s in the
ﬁrst wall channels and a lower velocity of 0.66
m/s in the back wall channel for the same MHD
pressure drop. The second poloidal pass of the
Pb–17Li through the large inner channel is much
slower, with an average velocity of 0.11 m/s.
Fig. 14 illustrates the results for the parameters
shown in Table 6. The maximum CVD-SiC tem-
perature at the ﬁrst wall (radial distance=0) is
1009°C, the maximum SiCf/SiC temperature is
996°C, and the maximum SiC/Pb–17Li interface
temperature at the inner channel wall is 994°C. In
this regard, and as discussed in Section 3.3, the
chemical compatibility of Pb–17Li and SiC at
high temperature is an area in need of R&D since
only one experimental datum exists in the open
literature for SiC (of unspeciﬁed purity) exposed
to static Pb–17Li at 800°C for over 1500 h.
In addition to the illustrative thermal analysis
described above, detailed structural, neutronics
and safety design analyses of the blanket have
been performed and can be found in Refs.
[7,24,27–29]. Some of the main design features
and
performance
parameters
are
highlighted
below.
1. A 3D neutronics analysis yields a tritium
breeding ratio of 1.1.
2. The 0.5-cm module side walls are pressure
balanced except for the two walls at each end
of a segment. These walls are thicker (about 2
cm) to accommodate the Pb–17Li pressure of
1 MPa.
3. The
maximum
SiCf/SiC
pressure+thermal
stress is well within 190 MPa in the ﬁrst wall
as well as in the separation wall.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
69
4. The Pb–17Li pressure drop through the blan-
ket is about 0.24 MPa.
5. Safety analyses show that the low decay heat
of SiC enables accommodation of any LOCA
or LOFA scenarios without serious conse-
quences to the blanket structure.
6. Maintenance methods have been investigated
that allow for end-of-life replacement of indi-
vidual components.
7. The 0.5-cm module side walls are pressure
balanced except for the two walls at each end
of a segment. These walls are thicker (about
2cm) to accommodate the Pb–17Li pressure of
1 MPa.
8. An annular Pb–17Li coolant piping is used to
service the blanket, with the lower temperature
inlet ﬂow in the annular channel and the
higher temperature outlet ﬂow in the inner
channel. In this way any effect of the high
SiC/Pb–17Li interface temperature on the in-
ner channel wall would only result in a leak to
the annular channel, which is tolerable. How-
ever, the structural integrity of the conﬁgura-
tion would be ensured by the low temperature
outer channel.
9. The fabrication scheme proposed for the blan-
ket only three radial/toroidal coolant-contain-
ment brazes per module, as illustrated by the
following fabrication steps for an outboard
segment consisting of six modules:
 Manufacturing separate halves of the SiCf/
SiC poloidal module by SiCf weaving and
SiC CVI or polymer processes;
 Sliding each half module over the free-ﬂoat-
ing inner separation wall;
 Brazing the two half modules together at
the mid-plane;
 Brazing the module end cap at the upper
poloidal end;
 Forming a segment by brazing six modules
together (this is a bond that is not in con-
tact with the coolant); and
 Brazing the annular manifold connections
to the lower poloidal end of the segment.
2.4.3. Diertor
Pb–17Li has a relatively low thermal conduc-
tivity and tends to offer limited heat removal
performances, in particular in the presence of a
magnetic ﬁeld. In order to accommodate MHD
effects, the proposed design:
 minimizes the interaction parameter (1),
which represents the ratio of MHD to inertial
forces;
Fig. 12. Mid-plane cross section of ARIES-AT outboard blanket modules (radial dimension in m).
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
70
Fig. 13. Cross section of an outboard ARIES-AT blanket
module (all dimensions in cm).
Table 5
Suggested SiCf/SiC parameters and properties for design anal-
ysis of SiCf/SiC-based power plants for the long term (20–30
years in the future, or more)a
Key SiC/SiC properties and parameters
Suggested value
Density
3000 kg/m3
Porosity
5%
200–300 GPa
Young’s modulus
0.16–0.18
Poisson’s ratio
4×10−6 K−1
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient
20 W/m-K
Thermal conductivity in plane
Thermal conductivity through thickness
20 W/m-K
Maximum allowable combined stress
190 MPa
Max. allowable temperature (swelling
1000°C
basis)
1000°C
Maximum allowable SiC/LiPb interface
temperature
Min. allowable temperature (thermal
600°C
conductivity basis)
Design
Max. allowable SiC burnup or other
lifetime parameter
dependent
$400/kg
Cost
a From the January 2000 International Town Meeting on
SiCf/SiC Design and Material Issues for Fusion Systems [26].
inertial with an interaction parameter 1. The
Pb–17Li then ﬂows toroidally to cool the high
heat ﬂux region through a very short ﬂow path (2
cm). It is then routed back to the other side of the
 directs the ﬂow in the high heat ﬂux region
parallel to the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld;
 minimizes the Pb–17Li ﬂow path and residence
time in the high heat ﬂux region.
The design is illustrated in Fig. 15, which shows
a cross section of a divertor plate. It consists of a
number of 2 cm×2.5 cm SiCf/SiC poloidal chan-
nels. The front SiCf/SiC wall is very thin (0.5 mm)
in order to maintain the maximum temperature
and combined stress limits to 1000°C and 
190 MPa, respectively. A 3.5-mm plasma-facing
layer of W is bonded to the thin SiCf/SiC to
provide additional structure to accommodate the
1.8-MPa Pb–17Li pressure and to provide sacriﬁ-
cial armor (about 1 mm).
In each channel a T-shaped ﬂow separator is
inserted. The Pb–17Li ﬂows poloidally through
one half of the channel, which acts as an inlet
header. The ﬂow is then forced to the plasma-fac-
ing region through small holes at one side of the
channel. The ﬂow through these small holes is
Fig. 14. 2D moving coordinate thermal analysis of Pb–17Li
ﬂow through an outboard blanket module.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
71
Table 6
ARIES-AT outboard blanket parameters assumed for the
thermal analysis
Geometry from plasma side:
CVD SiC thickness
1 mm
4 mm
SiCf/SiC thickness
SiCf/SiC thermal conductivity
20 W/m-K
4 mm
LiPb channel thickness
5 mm
SiCf/SiC separation wall thickness
SiCf/SiC separation wall thermal
6 W/m-K
conductivity
Pb–17Li parameters
4.2 m/s
Pb–17Li velocity in ﬁrst wall channel
Pb–17Li velocity in inner channel
0.11 m/s
764°C
Pb–17Li inlet temperature
Heat load conditions
Refs. [27,28]
Poloidal neutron wall load and plasma
heat ﬂux proﬁles used as input
(assuming no radiation from divertor)
Fig. 16. Temperature distribution in outer divertor plasma-fac-
ing channel assuming MHD-laminarized Pb–17Li ﬂow.
toroidal channel. Fig. 16 shows the typical results
for a case with an inlet Pb–17Li temperature of
653°C, a W thickness of 3 mm, a SiCf/SiC ﬁrst
wall thickness of 0.5 mm, a Pb–17Li toroidal
channel thickness of 2 mm, a SiCf/SiC inner wall
thickness of 0.5 mm, a Pb–17Li velocity of 0.35
m/s and a surface heat ﬂux of 5 MW/m2. The
maximum W temperature is about 1150°C, and
the
maximum
SiCf/SiC
temperature
is
about
950°C.
The resulting Pb–17Li pressure drop through
the divertor based on the proposed ﬂow conﬁgu-
poloidal channel serving as an outlet header. The
Pb–17Li velocity through the toroidal plasma-
facing channel can be adjusted by changing the
dimension of this channel or by increasing the
number of toroidal passes through a plate. The
reference design uses a 2-mm channel and a 2-pass
ﬂow, resulting in a 0.35 m/s velocity in the
toroidal channel and a 0.06 s residence time.
The 2D moving coordinate method was used
for the ﬂow analysis under the conservative as-
sumption
of
MHD-laminarized
ﬂow
in
the
Fig. 15. Cross section of outer divertor plate (all dimensions in cm).
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
72
ration is estimated at about 0.7 MPa. This is
signiﬁcantly larger than the blanket pressure drop.
To minimize pressure stresses in the piping and
blanket system, the Pb–17Li in the inlet manifold
is kept at 1.1 MPa. The Pb–17Li is then pressur-
ized to 1.8 MPa just before ﬂowing though the
divertor by means of an E–M pump making use
of the existing toroidal magnetic ﬁeld. The outlet
ﬂow from the divertor then rejoins the blanket
inlet manifold at about 1.1 MPa.
The divertor fabrication scheme also aims at
minimizing brazing and can be summarized as
follows:
1. manufacture separate SiCf/SiC toroidal halves
of the divertor plate by SiCf weaving and SiC
CVI or polymer processes; maintain constant
channel toroidal dimensions but tapered side
wall thicknesses to account for torus geometry;
2. insert the inner SiCf/SiC separation wall in
each divertor channel;
3. braze the two toroidal halves of the divertor
plate together;
4. braze the end cap and manifold on each end;
5. bond the W layer to the SiCf/SiC front wall by
plasma spray.
3. Material status
The materials research program attempts to
develop and improve candidate materials with
prospects to fulﬁll the design requirements laid
out in conceptual design studies. It provides prop-
erty data both for the existing state-of-the art
materials as well as reasonable extrapolations for
the time frame in which fusion energy is expected
to enter the marketplace. The key material devel-
opment tasks include: development of fabrication
and joining techniques for high quality and per-
formance SiCf/SiC; establishment of base proper-
ties; determination of irradiated properties; and
determination of stress and temperature limits
and material lifetime.
The current trend in SiCf/SiC composite devel-
opment is to improve stoichiometry both with the
ﬁber and the matrix. Chemical vapor inﬁltration
produces a stoichiometric, crystalline -SiC ma-
trix material. A similar matrix can be produced
with the polymer impregnation & pyrolysis (PIP)
process but this requires that the ﬁbers have the
thermal stability to withstand the high-tempera-
ture pyrolysis process needed to convert the poly-
mer to crystalline -SiC. As matured products,
the
newer
ﬁbers
such
as
Tyranno-SA®,
Hi-
Nicalon®-S and MER corporation ﬁber [26] are
expected to have the needed thermal stability so
that SiCf/SiC composites with these ﬁbers and a
PIP matrix is a possibility. Other processes in-
clude chemical vapor reaction (CVR), reaction
sintering (RS) and combined processing. At this
stage, it is not clear which is the most attractive
based on performance and cost, but they should
be prioritized, given the limited R&D resources.
The interface materials used to provide the
desired bonding between the ﬁbers and matrix
include C, SiC and BN. C, SiC and C/SiC inter-
faces are being developed and evaluated for their
radiation and chemical stability in fusion environ-
ments, while BN does not look attractive because
of the helium generation from the B.
Although a 3D architecture is preferred for
fusion applications, it is not the focus of current
development and experimental work mostly due
to the difﬁculty of inﬁltration in a conventional
architecture to provide low porosity. However,
SNECMA’s experience indicates that low porosity
can be achieved (5%) by non-orthogonal 3D
weaving for enhanced inﬁltration (by chemical
vapor inﬁltration, CVI) [26]. If required for her-
meticity reasons, the porosity can also be lowered
by subsequent melt inﬁltration (having no struc-
tural function). The use of new 3D SiCf/SiC com-
posites with a higher resistance to inter-laminar
shear stresses is very attractive and is described in
more detail in the next section.
A variety of methods can be applied for joining
SiCf/SiC to SiCf/SiC, including reaction bonding/
sintering, polymer-based methods, brazing, stitch-
ing and mechanical joints. However, the R&D is
still in an early stage in this area and much
remains to be done to develop reliable and practi-
cal joining techniques, as described in the next
section.
Cost is a key criterion when considering SiCf/
SiC in fusion applications. By analogy with the
evolution of the price of carbon ﬁber composites,
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
73
which has decreased substantially over the last 10
to 15 years, a Japanese study indicates that about
one order of magnitude reduction in cost could be
achieved with large-scale production of SiCf/SiC
[26]. This assumes a large market for SiCf/SiC and
a production process beneﬁting from the economy
of scale. In this sense, among currently available
advanced ﬁbers, Tyranno-SA would beneﬁt much
more
from
this
economy
of
scale
than
Hi-
Nicalon, for example. Based on current cost, it
seems reasonable to use $400 per kg of SiCf/SiC
for power plant studies, given a lead time of 20
years for development.
Since the cost of the ﬁbers represents about
50% of the total cost, a lower-cost manufacturing
technique is to start with a cheaper carbon ﬁber
and to transform it into a SiCf/SiC composite
through CVR. This is being investigated by MER
[26]. Such an approach could reduce the SiCf/SiC
cost to about $100 per kg or less. A key issue is
the completeness of the conversion process and
the closeness of the ﬁnal product to stoichiometry
since this would greatly impact the performance
and properties of the ﬁnal product.
3.1. Fabrication and joining
It is difﬁcult to manufacture a complicated
blanket shape (curved parts, stiffeners) with tradi-
tional 2D SiCf/SiC processes due to delamination
problems. As a consequence, the use of new 3D
SiCf/SiC composites with a higher resistance to
inter-laminar shear stresses seems inevitable. The
Cerasep® N3-1 produced by SNECMA by CVI
uses Nicalon® NL207 ﬁbers. This composite is
based on an advanced texture called GUIPEX®, a
multilayer 3D texture [9] in which a third texture
direction, created by linking layers during weav-
ing, minimizes delamination risks when shaping
and densifying the parts. The main properties of
Cerasep® N3-1 are reported in Table 1. However,
the maximum thickness of the 3D composite is
around 6 mm for the present CVI state of the art
techniques. The limits of this composite for fusion
power core applications are mainly linked to its
low thermal conductivity and its resistance to
irradiation damage. The use of low oxygen con-
tent ﬁbers like Hi-Nicalon ﬁbers (Nippon Carbon)
could help alleviate those two problems. Also, the
maximum
operating
temperature
based
on
strength degradation increases from about 1100°C
to about 1300°C. A new composite, Cerasep®
N4-1, which uses Hi-Nicalon ﬁbers is currently
under development by SNECMA. This new com-
posite appears very promising for fusion power
core applications, but no data are available.
In order to use SiCf/SiC as a structural mate-
rial, reliable and practical joining techniques are
required. A variety of methods can be used for
joining SiCf/SiC to SiCf/SiC. Although some of
them have already been industrialized, methods
that may qualify for fusion blanket assembly are
still in a developmental stage. Current efforts
focus mainly on establishing a technical basis for
joints with improved and tailorable properties
rather than on demonstrating speciﬁc properties
for speciﬁc joining techniques. The effect of neu-
tron irradiation, which is one of the most impor-
tant technical issues for application to fusion
blankets has still not been evaluated. Methods of
joining SiCf/SiC to SiCf/SiC can be classiﬁed into
SiC-based, non-SiC-based and mechanical joints.
The ﬁrst category includes reaction bonding and
pre-ceramic polymer adhesives. The advantages of
SiC-based joints are their coefﬁcients of thermal
expansion (CTE), generally comparable to SiCf/
SiC, excellent thermo-chemical stability and the
straightforward applicability of techniques devel-
oped for monolithic SiC production and matrix
densiﬁcation of SiCf/SiC. The second category
includes glass–ceramic joints and metal-based
brazes. These methods are generally easy to apply
and to disassemble since they do not incorporate
the production of refractory SiC, though their
reactivity with SiCf/SiC and the consequences
(CTE mismatch effects and thermo-chemical sta-
bility) need to carefully be examined. Examples of
the last category are mechanical fastening and
fabric co-stitching. These methods may be used in
combination with any adhesive-type joint. Tech-
niques of fairly complex shaping of ﬁber fabrics
have been developed in recent advanced motor
generator programs in order to form near-net-
shape gas turbine components, and the techniques
like co-stitching might be classiﬁed into the ‘fabric
shaping’ category.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
74
3.1.1. Reaction bonding
Presently, reaction bonding is a most promising
method for permanently joining SiCf/SiC. In this
process, molten silicon reacts with carbon in ﬁne
powder or porous skeleton shapes to produce SiC.
Reaction bonding appears advantageous because
it produces fully crystalline SiC with a very high
strength, high thermal conductivity and excellent
creep properties, in addition to other inherently
attractive properties of SiC. Flexural strength and
thermal conductivity of approximately 1 GPa and
130 W/m K, respectively, have been demonstrated
for a monolithic SiC developed by the CREST-
ACE project [30] through a process that incorpo-
rates
a
molten
silicon
inﬁltration
to
C–SiC
powder complex. Several other reaction bonding
techniques have been successfully developed, in-
cluding a robust technique called ARCJoinT [31].
A potential disadvantage of the reaction bonding
is that it requires a heat treatment typically at
about 1700 K, or a temperature over the melting
point of silicon, which is harmful to the older
generations of SiC-based ﬁbers. However, this
may not a problem for SiCf/SiC using advanced
ﬁbers that survive up to over 2000 K [32].
3.1.2. Pre-ceramic polymers
A pyrolyzed product of pre-ceramic polymers is
generally a mixture of nano-crystalline SiC, amor-
phous silica and amorphous or glassy carbon with
a substantial porosity. The mostly-amorphous Si–
C–O material has a reduced strength, a very low
thermal conductivity and inferior thermo-chemi-
cal and radiation stabilities. However, the proper-
ties of polymer-derived SiC are rapidly improving
with recent extensive efforts. A near-stoichiometry
composition will be achieved by using polymer
precursors that are inert and designed for stoi-
chiometric composition. Polymer precursors for
improved stoichiometry, e.g. polymethylsilane by
Ube industries and AHPCS by Starﬁre Systems
Corporation, are becoming commercially avail-
able [33]. A precursor for both stoichiometry and
reduced oxidization susceptibility is being devel-
oped in the CREST-ACE program. The mechani-
cal properties of SiCf/SiC joints with AHPCS and
other pre-ceramic polymers are under evaluation
in a collaborative work between Kyoto University
and
Paciﬁc
Northwest
National
Laboratory
(PNNL).
3.1.3. Glass–ceramic joints
Glass–ceramic is a relatively new material that
consists of glass and ceramic. The beneﬁts of this
material include tailorable properties, oxidation
resistance and mechanical strength provided by
the ceramic phases [34]. As one of the options for
SiCf/SiC joints for fusion, Politeknico di Torino
and Kyoto University are jointly studying a cal-
cia–alumina (CA) glass ceramic. They have so far
demonstrated (in their ﬁrst trial) an excellent wet-
tability of CA with crystalline SiC and shear
strength of about 30 MPa for a pressureless joint
[35]. The glass ceramic joints will allow quick and
non-permanent use, since they may easily be de-
composed at temperatures exceeding the softening
temperature of the glassy phase. Applicability to
permanent joints relies on future development,
including the evaluation of neutron irradiation
effects.
3.1.4. Brazing
A promising brazing technique has been re-
cently proposed using a brazing process already
dedicated for refractory materials to SiCf/SiC.
The braze material, Brasic®, is compatible with
SiC and is being developed by CEA, France [36].
The major advantages of the ﬁller alloys, com-
posed of low-activation elements, are: high tem-
perature resistance (1400°C), no chemical reaction
with SiC, good wetting and good adherence to the
interface (mechanical shear strength as high as
80–100 MPa up to 800°C). Brasic® alloys ensure
at the same time good mechanical bonding and a
perfect tightness of the brazed junction. By using
different alloys and compositions (Brasic H2 and
V2 or V3) and brazing in vacuum or in inert
atmosphere it has been possible to control the
inﬁltration of the alloy. Use of Brasic V3 for
joining at 1300°C in a neutral atmosphere resulted
in a sound joint with perfect ﬁlling of the joint
gap and without inﬁltration in the composite, as
shown in Fig. 17. For this joint, a shear strength
of 174 MPa was obtained at room temperature
and about 100 MPa at 800°C. The main limita-
tion of the method results from the free Si content
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
75
and the open high porosity of the composite. This
low-activation brazing alloy can in principle be
used also for coating SiCf/SiC composites.
3.2. Properties
3.2.1. Fiber properties
Fibers are the backbone of the continuous ﬁber
ceramic matrix (SiCf/SiC) composites being con-
sidered for fusion energy applications [37–39].
Even though composite properties are controlled
by several factors besides ﬁber strength, such as
volume fraction of ﬁbers, ﬁber/matrix interface
structure, ﬁber weave architecture and matrix
properties, there are key ﬁber properties that con-
trol
radiation
resistance,
high-temperature
strength and stability and weaveability. A sum-
mary of the SiC ﬁbers being considered for fusion
energy applications is given in Table 7.
The ﬁber diameter and elastic modulus deter-
mine the weaveability of the ﬁber; consequently,
smaller diameter ﬁbers are needed with a high
elastic modulus. Coarser ﬁber weave architecture
must be used for high elastic modulus ﬁbers. The
Nicalon and Tyranno ﬁbers are derived from
polymers with a trend towards higher ﬁber purity,
crystallinity, stoichiometry and elastic modulus in
the development of Nicalon ﬁbers. Dow-Corning
no longer makes a SiC ﬁber, but this ﬁber is listed
as typical of those made from sintered -SiC
crystals. The MER ﬁber is made by chemical
Fig. 18. Bend stress relaxation (BSR) test of SiC-based ﬁbers
in Argon [40,41].
conversion of C ﬁbers with the SiC component of
the ﬁber being crystalline, stoichiometric, -SiC;
however, these ﬁbers can be made with a varying
degree of conversion so they may have a C core
and a SiC outer layer.
The creep strength of SiC ﬁbers is directly
related to the density, degree of crystallinity and
stoichiometry. The bend stress relaxation test is a
simple test for comparing the creep properties of
ﬁbers as shown in Fig. 18. This ﬁgure shows a
relaxation ratio m as a function of inverse temper-
ature, where no creep corresponds to an m=1
and increasing creep strain corresponds to de-
creasing values of m. There is a clear shift in the
curves to higher temperatures, i.e. lower recipro-
cal temperatures with increasing ﬁber density,
crystallinity, stoichiometry and elastic modulus.
The ranking in order of increasing creep strength
is: Lox-M Tyranno, Nicalon 201, UF-Dev, Hi-
Nicalon and Dow-Corning (Dev and NASA).
3.2.2. Composite properties
A summary of the properties of several com-
mercially available SiCf/SiC composites is given in
Table 8. It should be stated that laboratory-scale
composites with rapidly improving properties are
currently being developed in a very short time
cycle. From the table, the speciﬁc gravity ranges
from a low of 2100 to a high of 2700 kg/m3 while
Fig. 17. Brasic® joint micrography.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
76
Table 7
Properties of as-produced silicon-based ﬁbersa
Composition and structure
Dia.
Thermal expansion
Avg. strength
Density
Trade name
Modulus
(GPa)
(g/cm3)
(m)
coeff. b
(GPa)
Nicalon®
65% SiC, 23% SiO2, 11% C
14
3.0
220
2.55
(3 nm -SiC grains)
77% SiC, 23% C, 0.5% O
14
2.8
270
Hi-Nicalon®
2.74
(10–100 nm -SiC grains)
95% SiC, 5% C (10–100 nm -SiC grains)
14
Nicalon-S
2.6
420
3.1
99% SiC (30 nm -SiC grains)
10
Dow-Sylramic
2.6
420
3.1
4.6
0.5%Al, balance SiC
8
Tyranno-SA
2.8
4.6
400
3.1
(50–500nm -SiC grains)
-SiC
5
–
340–410
2.9–3.1
[MER]
4.6
a Although Nicalon and Hi-Nicalon are not considered for fusion applications, they are included as standard ﬁbers.
b Average from 20 to 100°C.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
77
Table 8
Properties of several SiCf/SiC composites
Property
Units
SNECMA (Cerasep®
DuPont
DuPont
DuPont enhanced
DuPont
DOW/Kaiser S-201
SiCf/SiC
Hi-Nicalon
Nicalon-S
N2-1)
296 K
1273 K
296 K
1273 K
296 K
1273 K
296 K
1273 K
296 K
773 K
%
40
40
40
40
Fiber content
40
40
40
40
40
kg/m3
2500
2500
2500
2500
2300
2300
2100
–
2700
Speciﬁc
gravity
%
10
10
10
10
Porosity
10
10
4
4
–
Tensile
MPa
285
285
200
228
228
254
207
–
217
strength
%
0.65
0.75
0.22
0.28
0.41
Elongation
0.61
–
–
0.23
(tensile)
Young’s
GPa
230
200
215
226
141
145
80
–
270
modulus
(tensile)
MPa
300
400
300
Flexural
400
345
–
366
–
336
strength
Compression strength
MPa
580
400
580
480
In plane
503
–
450
–
–
Through the
MPa
420
380
420
380
–
–
–
–
–
thickness
–
–
MPa
40
35
40
35
Shear
31
–
28
strength
(interlamina
r)
Thermal diffusiity
×10−6 m2/s
12
5
12
5
–
–
1.1
0.7
In plane
–
12
×10−6 m2/s
6
2
6
2
Through the
1.5 a
–
0.8
0.6
12
thickness
Coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
×10−6 K−1
3
3
3
3
3
2.9
4.3
–
–
In plane
×10−6 K−1
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
Through the
2.9
–
–
–
–
thickness
MPa m1/2
30
30
30
30
Fracture
–
–
–
–
–
toughness
J/kg K
620
1200
620
1200
–
–
727
1248
–
Speciﬁc heat
0.8
0.8
0.8
Total
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.94
–
–
emissivity
a Thermal conductivity (W/m K).
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
78
the porosity ranged from a low of 4% to a high of
10%. The elastic modulii closely reﬂect the mod-
ulus of the ﬁbers. This is particularly noticeable
for the DuPont composite with Hi-Nicalon ﬁbers.
The composite elastic modulus is 270 GPa and the
Hi-Nicalon ﬁber modulus is also 270 GPa. The
crystalline -SiC matrix produced by CVI has a
modulus approaching that of monolithic SiC ex-
cept for the effect of porosity. The sum of these
factors has resulted fortuitously in a composite
with an elastic modulus equal to the ﬁber. The
tensile strengths of these materials are less than
the ﬂexural strengths because of the greater com-
pressive strengths of these materials. The elastic
modulus of the DuPont enhanced material is de-
creased substantially from the CVI-SiCf/SiC com-
posite material because of the additive used to
improve the stress–rupture properties in high-
oxygen concentration environments. The strength
of these materials is relatively insensitive to tem-
perature up to the limits of ﬁber stability. Materi-
als made with the newer, more thermally stable
ﬁbers will retain their strengths to higher tempera-
tures than those made with the older, less ther-
mally stable ﬁbers. Some increase in ﬂexural
strength occurs at the composite fabrication tem-
perature relative to ambient temperature. Frac-
ture toughness values for SiCf/SiC composites are
also listed in Table 8, showing a value of 30
MPa m1/2. This is a KQ value (a measure of the
ultimate failure load of a notched specimen) and
not a KIC value (plane-strain critical stress inten-
sity) because these materials do not fail by propa-
gation of an unstable crack; rather, they exhibit R
curve or rising load failure. The toughness value is
highly dependent on the ﬁber/matrix interface
properties and weakly dependent on the ﬁber and
matrix properties. As with the tensile and ﬂexural
strength, the fracture toughness is temperature
independent
up
to
the
ﬁber
instability
temperature.
Through thickness thermal diffusivity values (as
shown in Table 8) range from about 12×10−6
m2/s at room temperature to about 2×10−6 m2/s
at 1000°C (corresponding to thermal conductivity
values of about 20 and about 6 W/m K, respec-
tively) for material made by CVI. Much smaller
values are given for the DOW/Kaiser S-201 mate-
rial made by the PIP process, which results in an
amorphous matrix with low thermal conductivity.
The highest room temperature thermal conductiv-
ity has been reported for a MER CVR processed
composite with a value of 41 W/m K as compared
with a value of 6 W/m K for CVI processed
material. The MER material is processed from
C/C composites and the ﬁbers retain some frac-
tion of graphite, which increases the thermal
conductivity.
Both the composite creep rate and the time-de-
pendent crack growth rate are dependent on the
ﬁber creep rates [42–44]. DiCarlo and Yun [42]
showed a decreasing creep rate for composite
material with Nicalon, Hi-Nicalon and Sylramic
ﬁbers, respectively. At 1400°C, there was a de-
crease in the creep rate by a factor of 2.5 for these
three ﬁbers. Henager and Jones [43,44] likewise
demonstrated that the crack growth rate of com-
posites is directly dependent on the ﬁber creep
rate and that the crack growth rate of composite
material made with Nicalon ﬁbers is equal to that
of composite material made with Hi-Nicalon
ﬁbers but tested at a 75°C higher temperature.
This temperature shift is identical to that shown
in Fig. 18 for these two ﬁbers.
Thermal fatigue and thermal shock are impor-
tant properties of ceramic composites for fusion
energy systems: thermal fatigue because of heat-
up/cool-down cycles, and thermal shock because
of plasma discharge and rapid heating of ﬁrst wall
materials. Clearly, the magnitude of the thermal
spike in blanket materials decreases with increas-
ing distance from the ﬁrst wall. The fatigue and
thermal shock behaviors of ceramics have been
reviewed by Jones et al. [37]. The thermal fatigue
of a Nicalon-ﬁber-reinforced SiCf/SiC composite
was evaluated by Jones and Henager [45] using
low-cycle mechanical fatigue. They found that the
crack velocity decreases with increasing fatigue
cycles in a manner similar to that observed for
sub-critical crack growth with time. There was a
factor of 10 decrease in the load cycle between the
ﬁrst and 25th cycles at a stress intensity of 18
MPa m1/2. The sub-critical crack growth decreases
with time because additional bridging (i.e. load
carrying) ﬁbers accumulated behind the crack tip.
At higher stress intensities the crack velocities
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
79
after one and 25 load cycles converge. There have
been several studies of high cycle fatigue of con-
tinuous ﬁber reinforced composites [46–48] that
support the observation that these materials ex-
hibit a fatigue stress threshold below which crack
growth does not occur. This stress threshold is
approximately equal to the matrix cracking stress.
Above this threshold stress, Holmes [46] has
shown that, at 1200°C and 10 Hz, the number of
cycles to failure is a function of the R ratio and
peak stress. For the material studied by Holmes
[46], the matrix cracking stress was 200 MPa and
the ultimate strength was 380 MPa at 1200°C.
The thermal shock response of materials is very
dependent on the temperature change and the
change rate and the constraint on the sample or
component. For continuous ﬁber–ceramic–ma-
trix composites, the thermal shock behavior also
depends on whether the temperature change is
positive or negative. Most thermal shock data are
for samples quenched from an elevated tempera-
ture; however, in a fusion reactor a plasma dis-
charge
will
result
in
rapid
heating.
Ceramic
composite properties are not strain rate depen-
dent, other than in the creep strain rate range, so
the heating rate should not be a concern. Thermal
shock tests with a positive temperature change
were performed by Eckel et al. [49] and Wang and
Singh [50]. Eckel measured the thermal shock of
monolithic and composite material heated from
1300 to 2300°C in a burner rig. The monolithic
material failed after 1.5 cycles while the SiCf/SiC
composite survived 25 cycles without a loss of
strength. However, with a heating rate of 1900°C/
s the composite exhibited a 35% strength loss as
compared with no strength loss at a heating rate
of 1700°C/s.
3.2.3. Properties of irradiated materials
Neutron irradiation of SiC induces changes in
properties that are critical to its application in
fusion energy systems. Displacement of Si and C
atoms occur with different displacement energies
with C having the lower displacement energy and
therefore the greater displacement rate. These
atomic displacements result in the formation of
dislocation loops parallel to the {111} crystallo-
graphic planes. These loops induce an isotropic
dimensional change that saturates at neutron
ﬂuences of 2×1020 n/cm2 at temperatures below
about 1000°C. The saturation swelling value be-
comes dependent only on the irradiation tempera-
ture below 1000°C once the saturation ﬂuence has
been achieved. A signiﬁcant amount of data has
been generated on the swelling of SiC for the
high-temperature gas-cooled reactor, temperature
monitors in irradiation experiments and now for
the fusion materials program. A summary of this
database is shown in Fig. 19, along with several
curves ﬁtted to the data. It is apparent that the
swelling decreases with increasing temperature to
a relatively small volume change of a few tenths
of a percent at 1000°C. A density decrease accom-
panies the swelling response. Irradiation of SiC at
temperatures above 1000°C results in tetrahedral
voids bounded by {111} planes and the volume
change is ﬂuence-dependent, unlike irradiation be-
low 1000°C [52]. The quantity and quality of the
swelling data for SiC at temperatures above
1000°C is lower than that for temperatures below
1000°C; there is a need to better deﬁne the mini-
mum temperature for void swelling, the ﬂuence
dependence and the magnitude of swelling. Di-
mensional changes in composite materials made
by CVI and irradiated at temperatures below
1000°C are consistent with those for monolithic
material [53] because the matrix deﬁnes the pri-
mary composite response. The CVI matrix is crys-
talline, stoichiometric -SiC, so it follows the
swelling curve in Fig. 19. Crystalline, stoichiomet-
ric -SiC ﬁbers such as the DOW Sylramic and
MER ﬁbers exhibit the same swelling response as
shown in Fig. 20 (DOW-X ﬁbers).
Polymer derived ﬁbers and matrix materials
(PIP) that have not been fully crystallized by
thermal processing shrink during irradiation are
shown in Fig. 20. While the database shown in
the ﬁgure is for a range of temperatures it pro-
vides a clear representation of the response of
crystalline and non-crystalline SiC ﬁbers. Fiber
shrinkage leads to ﬁber/matrix debonding as re-
ported by Hollenberg et al. [53] and a decrease in
elastic modulus and fracture strength. Therefore,
there is a critical need to optimize the microstruc-
ture of SiCf/SiC composites (i.e. ﬁber, ﬁber/matrix
interphase and matrix) to minimize the interfacial
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
80
stress between the ﬁber and matrix. The results in
Fig. 20 show that the density of the crystalline
and polymer-derived ﬁbers approach each other
with increasing neutron ﬂuence.
Generation of point defects and dislocation
loops in monolithic SiC causes phonon scattering
and a commensurate decrease in the thermal con-
ductivity. A summary of the ratio of the irradi-
ated to unirradiated thermal conductivity is given
in Fig. 21 where it can be seen that this ratio is
about
0.5
for
an
irradiation
temperature
of
1000°C and decreases to 0.1–0.2 for an irradia-
tion temperature of 400°C. This curve is the in-
verse
of
the
swelling
curve
because
defects
Fig. 19. Volumetric neutron swelling for SiC irradiated to saturation doses as a function of irradiation temperature [51].
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
81
Fig. 20. Density as a function of dose or ﬂuence for four types
of uncoated SiC-based ﬁbers [54].
Irradiation effects on the ﬂexural strength of
SiCf/SiC composites for Nicalon-CG ﬁber rein-
forced material are shown in Fig. 22 up to a
ﬂuence of 80 dpa. This plot shows the four-point
bend strength as a function of temperature and
ﬂuence for the available data along with some
extrapolation to high temperatures. The maxi-
mum strength in both the unirradiated and irradi-
ated conditions occurs at 800–1000°C with a drop
of the bend strength from about 400 to about 200
MPa for the irradiated material at 800°C. Unirra-
diated four-point bend strengths for material with
Hi-Nicalon ﬁbers is about 500 MPa. The decrease
in the fracture strength with irradiation has been
coupled
with
the
shrinkage
of
the
polymer-
derived, non-crystalline Nicalon-CG ﬁber (Fig.
20) and the subsequent debonding of the ﬁber
from the matrix such that load-transfer to the
ﬁbers does not occur. Even with this debonding
the four-point bend strength of a composite mate-
rial irradiated to 80 dpa at 800°C is 200 MPa. The
tensile strength will be about 66% of the ﬂexural
strength so the irradiated tensile strength is likely
to be about 130 MPa. Snead [58] has measured
the four-point bend strength of composite mate-
rial reinforced with Hi-Nicalon and irradiated to
1 dpa (Fig. 23). These results clearly show the
improved radiation resistance obtained with com-
produced by irradiation results in phonon disper-
sion. Both monolithic and composite materials
are included in this ﬁgure even though the ﬁber
and ﬁber/matrix interface affect the composite
thermal conductivity in addition to radiation-in-
duced defects [56]. The Hollenberg and Senor
composites are made with Nicalon-CG ﬁbers,
which have a very low thermal conductivity and
therefore contribute little to the composite ther-
mal conductivity.
Fig. 21. Thermal conductivity degradation as a function of irradiation and test temperature for crystalline SiC and SiCf/SiC
composites with CVI-SiC matrix [55].
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
82
Fig. 22. Proposed strength–irradiation dose/temperature surface for SiCf/SiC composite [57].
posites made with Hi-Nicalon and Nicalon-S
ﬁbers. The strength of irradiated material with
Nicalon-S is equal to or slightly greater than the
strength of unirradiated material.
Irradiation was shown by Price [59] and Scholz
[60] to enhance the creep rate of -SiC produced
by CVD for SCS-6 ﬁbers (Fig. 24). SCS-6 ﬁbers
are formed by CVD on a C core. It is clear that
irradiation enhances the creep rate of crystalline
-SiC above that for thermal creep at tempera-
tures ranging from 450 to 1000°C. The irradia-
tion creep rate is independent of temperature over
this range in a manner similar to that exhibited by
metals. Little is known about the mechanisms
involved in the irradiation enhanced creep of SiC.
Also, the effect of ﬁber creep on composite creep
can be described as shown earlier for crack
growth controlled by thermal creep of ﬁbers.
However, for a CVI composite with a crystalline
-SiC matrix reinforced with Nicalon-S or other
highly crystalline ﬁbers the creep rate of the ﬁber
and matrix will become equal. Under these cir-
cumstances, the composite may creep more like
monolithic SiC as shown by Price, although a
more thorough analysis that includes load transfer
to the ﬁbers and the stress dependence of creep of
the matrix and ﬁber at different stresses must be
completed before the creep behavior of SiCf/SiC
composites can be fully described. In the extreme
case where the ﬁbers creep at the same rate as the
matrix, the data (Fig. 24) of Price [59] can be used
to estimate the irradiation-enhanced creep rate.
This creep rate is 10−10 s−1 at a stress of 200
Fig. 23. FCVI-SiC matrix, C-interphase, plain weave com-
posite 1 dpa, HFIR irradiation.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
83
Fig. 24. The temperature dependence of the irradiation creep
compliance determined for light ion, low dose (0.07 dpa)
and neutron, high dose (7.7 dpa) irradiations of SCS-6 SiC
ﬁber and CVD -SiC strips (from Price), respectively [61].
plot (Fig. 25) of the transmutation rate for an
ARIES ﬁrst wall design [1] shows a very large
build-up of He and H and a signiﬁcant increase in
the Mg concentration. The effect of these chemi-
cal changes on the properties of SiC and SiCf/SiC
composites is not known although some studies
using He ion implantation followed by neutron
irradiation or ion irradiation have been completed
or are in progress. Helium release studies by
Sasaki et al. [62] have demonstrated that He is
mobile in the SiC lattice at temperatures as low as
250°C but that He trapped at crystal interfaces is
immobilized up to about 1000°C. Signiﬁcant he-
lium release from crystal interfaces occurs at tem-
peratures exceeding 1800°C. Therefore, it is likely
that the helium generated by nuclear transmuta-
tion will be retained in the structure at crystal
interfaces in the ﬁber, ﬁber/matrix interface or the
CVI growth interfaces unless the He can escape
through open pores.
3.2.4. Helium effects
Transmuted He gas effects have been simulated
using He implantation or simultaneous He-ion
and heavy-ion irradiation. Calculation of the total
amount of transmuted He based on fusion reactor
material design was carried out by Noda et al.
[63]. The He/dpa ratio is predicted to be about
100 appm/dpa in the ﬁrst wall region of the solid
breeder blanket system when using SiCf/SiC com-
posite as the structural material. Helium is an
insoluble element in almost all the solid materials,
and it stabilizes vacancy type clusters. It may
enhance void swelling of SiC under fusion reactor
conditions.
Accelerator irradiation experiments have been
used to study helium effects. Single, dual, or
triple-beam experiments have been conducted to
investigate helium effects on microstructural evo-
lution. The microstructural development of a
composite containing advanced ﬁber fabrics was
not clearly observed below 800°C, probably be-
cause the irradiation temperature was too low for
helium to move and to cluster [64,65], but small
clusters of defects were observed. Helium diffu-
sion behavior and microstructural observation of
SiCf/SiC composites, SiC ﬁber and monolithic SiC
was reported by Hasegawa et al. [66]. Helium in
MPa and a temperature between 450 and 1000°C.
This rate translates into 0.3% per year, which is
sufﬁciently
large
to
be
considered
in
design
criteria.
The interaction of neutrons with SiC produces
chemical transmutations as well as atomic dis-
placements. These transmutants may be gaseous,
such as He and H, or solid such as Mg and Al. A
Fig. 25. Silicon carbide transmutation products–ARIES [1]
ﬁrst wall irradiation at 4.7 MW/m2.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
84
carbon phases becomes mobile between 500 and
800°C. Helium in the SiC phase becomes mobile
above 900 or 1000°C. In the higher temperature
region, the He desorption rate from the SiC ﬁbers
becomes much larger than from monolithic SiC.
This result is consistent with a previous diffusion
study by Jung [67]. These results suggest that
helium might be mobile in C and the amorphous
like Si-C phase in the composite in the expected
range of reactor operating temperature.
Mechanical property changes were investigated
using high energy He implantation by cyclotrons
[60,61]. Bending tests of SiCf/SiC composites after
high temperature implantation (950°C) up to a
helium concentration of 2500 appm showed a
38% mean decrease of strength. The load–dis-
placement curve exhibited a signiﬁcant decrease of
the
values
of
the
maximum
deﬂection
[68].
Swelling of the SiC matrix and shrinkage of
Nicalon ﬁber were reported by Scholz et al. [70].
A decrease in strength was observed at about 150
appm implantation at temperatures ranging from
400 to 800°C [69]. Microstructural observations of
He-implanted SiCf/SiC composites were reported
by Hasegawa et al., as shown in Fig. 26 [71].
Helium bubbles were not observed at the interface
between the matrix and interphase(C), and be-
tween the ﬁber and interphase(C) or in the SiC
ﬁber after about 10000 appm Helium implanta-
tion
at
room
temperature
and
annealing
at
1400°C. Bubbles were observed only at the grain
boundaries in SiC. Helium desorption results can
explain this microstructure.
3.2.5. Compatibility
3.2.5.1. SiC/PbLi. Only limited data on the com-
patibility of SiCf/SiC with Pb–17Li are available.
Fenici and Scholz [72] reported the results of
exposure of 2D CVI-SiCf/SiC composites to static
Pb–17Li at 800°C for 1500 h. Except for a pene-
tration of Pb–17Li into the composite through
the open pores, the results indicated that the
SiCf/SiC composites are practically inert in Pb–
17Li. Tests, for relevant Pb–17Li velocity (up to 1
m/s), duration (10000 h), and high temperatures
(about 1100°C) have yet to be performed.
Fig. 26. TEM micrographs of SiCf/SiC composites after he-
lium implantation and annealing at 1400°C for 1 h: (A) SiC
ﬁber/carbon coating; (B) carbon coating/SiC matrix; and (C)
SiC matrix.
3.2.5.2. SiC/ceramic breeders and SiC/Be. The
compatibility of SiCf/SiC commercial composite
with solid breeders (Li4SiO4 and Li2TiO3) under
fusion relevant conditions was investigated by
LaBarbera et al. [73]. The ceramic breeder Li4SiO4
was industrially produced by Glaswerke Schott
Co. (Germany) and has an average diameter of
0.55 mm [74]; the Li2TiO3 pebbles have a shape
and dimensions similar to the Li4SiO4 ones and
have
been
manufactured
by
ENEA-Casaccia
(Italy). The ceramic composite investigated was
the 3D Cerasep® N3-1 (Nicalon CG+CVI SiC
matrix) [75]; the samples were subjected to a ﬁnal
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
85
uniform CVD SiC coating (about 100 m thick).
Three cells were operated with Li4SiO4 and three
others with Li2TiO3 for 216, 1000 and 10000 h at
800°C in ﬂowing He containing 1000 ppm H2;
downstream operating samples (so-called ‘blank’)
and immersed samples were provided for each
cell.
After 10000 h for the Li4SiO4, test, lithium
metasilicate (Li2SiO3) and other complex silicates
were found on blank samples indicating a lithium
migration out of the reaction chamber. On im-
mersed samples the original SiC coating was still
present after exposure: its thickness ranged from
80 to 100 m. A surface layer of about 30 m of
Li2SiO3 that was not adherent but heavily cracked
was observed (Fig. 27). The transformation of the
SiC coating is not limited to a protective ﬁlm
since a linear law of weight increase was observed,
but no changes have been detected inside the
specimens. Slight changes of the mechanical prop-
erties (Young’s modulus and ﬂexural strength)
were observed at different temperatures. There-
fore, for Li4SiO4 exposure, a long lifetime can be
foreseen for this type of composite depending on
the SiC coating layer thickness.
On blank samples over Li2TiO3 only silica was
found for 10000 h, while on immersed samples
the original SiC coating was not present over
about half of the surface and a heavily cracked
layer of 80–100 m, identiﬁed as various silicates
and silica, was observed. The original SiC layer is
full of voids and cracks across its entire thickness
Fig. 28. SEM cross section pictures of SiCf/SiC samples after
10000 h of exposure to Li2TiO3.
(Fig. 28). After 10000 h, SiC ﬁbers are not pro-
tected any more and are exposed to the reacting
environment. In spite of these observations me-
chanical properties appear not to be signiﬁcantly
affected, indicating that the bulk is not damaged
after up to 10000 h. Therefore, since the SiC
coating is consumed and the ﬁbers are exposed to
the gas phase, a rapid reduction of the mechanical
properties is foreseen for longer exposure times.
The chemical reactivity of monolithic SiC with
Li oxide breeder materials and beryllium was
studied by Kleykamp by isothermal and an-
isothermal annealing [76]. Powder reaction experi-
ments were made between -SiC and Li4SiO4,
LiZrO3 and LiTiO3 pellets in a quartz tube fur-
nace at 700°C for two weeks under static Ar. No
reaction between -SiC and the Li ceramics breed-
ers was observed after two weeks of isothermal
annealing.
Conversely,
anisothermal
annealing
has shown that following exposure to:
 Li4SiO4: the -SiC remained unaffected but at
temperature
higher
than
1000°C
the
SiO2
formed (following Li, O2 and Li2O evaporation
from solid Li4SiO4) was found to react with
Li4SiO4 to produce Li3SiO3;
 Li2ZrO3: a reaction between -SiC and Li2ZrO3
with the production of ZrC and Li2SiO3 took
place at temperatures 1100°C;
 Li2TiO3: a solid state reaction occurred be-
tween -SiC and Li2TiO3 with the formation of
TiC and Li2SiO3 at temperatures 1160°C.
Fig. 27. SEM cross section pictures of SiCf/SiC samples after
10000 h of exposure to Li4SiO4.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
86
The compatibility with Be was studied by an-
nealing a -SiC–Be pebbles mixture in a closed
cylindrical refractory metal capsule between 700
and 900°C for 70 days. No indication of an
incompatibility between Be and SiC was reported
after
the
700°C
annealing,
whereas,
between
800°C and 900°C, a two-phase Be2C–Si was ob-
served on the SiC pellet. The thickness of this
phase increased with exposure time because Be2C
and Si are in thermodynamic equilibrium at
1000°C. For this reason the development of a
protective coating on SiCf/SiC, able to prevent Be
diffusion into the SiC at reactor operating condi-
tions, will be required for breeding blankets with
Be as multiplier.
3.3. Stress limits
3.3.1. Background
SiCf/SiC composites presently envisaged for fu-
sion reactors are still in an early phase of develop-
ment. The ability to correctly assess their limits is
therefore a key factor to provide guidelines for
further R&D. The appropriate design methodolo-
gies have to account for the peculiarities of their
mechanical behavior, in particular:
 Non-linearity of the stress–strain relation un-
der tensile loading; this non-linearity is due to
the progressive development of damage mecha-
nisms inside the composite.
 Different mechanical properties depending on
the loading direction. Even for 3D composites,
the number of ﬁbers through the thickness is
lower and their arrangement different. Me-
chanical properties are generally worse along
this direction.
 Different failure mechanisms and therefore dif-
ferent strengths under tensile and compressive
loading. Under tensile loading failure is due to
damage accumulation, while under compressive
loading the mechanical behavior is brittle and
elastic up to rupture.
The methodology commonly used is to consider
two independent successive processes: deforma-
tion under load and failure. The stress ﬁeld distri-
bution is then obtained by means of speciﬁc
behavioral models, and the resistance criteria are
expressed in terms of the stress components. Some
authors [77,78] propose instead to derive the resis-
tance criteria by imposing an instability condition
on the mathematical expression of the stress–
strain relation. Although this approach is more
correct from a theoretical point of view, it pre-
sents the drawback of being tied to the particular
damage model used and therefore will not be
considered here.
3.3.2. Modeling of the mechanical behaior of
SiCf/SiC composites
Regardless of the manufacturing process, the
non-linear mechanical behavior of SiCf/SiC com-
posites depends on the interactions between the
ﬁbers and matrix during loading. These interac-
tions lead at ﬁrst to matrix microcracking, then to
matrix/ﬁber decohesion, followed by the opening
of microcracks, and ﬁnally to ﬁbers (i.e. com-
posite) failure. Speciﬁc behavioral models have
been developed in the last years and one of them
has recently been implemented in the ﬁnite ele-
ment method code
CASTEM2000 used for the
thermo-mechanical analyses of the TAURO blan-
ket [13]. Fig. 29 shows the results of tension test
simulations at different loading directions, and
compares them with those obtained assuming lin-
ear elastic behavior. Numerical values are referred
to the 2D-CVI-Cerasep® composites. Two major
stages characterize the mechanical behavior: in
the ﬁrst stage, cracks grow perpendicular to the
loading direction and the in-plane mechanical be-
havior is isotropic; in the second stage, crack
Fig. 29. Simulation of in- and off-axis incremental tension–
compression test performed with the ﬁnite element code
CASTEM2000 using a speciﬁc behavioral model for SiCf/SiC
composites.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
87
growth occurs perpendicular to the ﬁbers and the
mechanical behavior depends on the loading
direction.
3.3.3. Resistance criteria
Numerous failure criteria have already been
proposed for composite materials [79,80]. In their
simplest form they consist of a number of expres-
sions each of which is related by a separate stress/
strain term. This allows for some physical insight
into the mode of failure, but interactions between
different terms are neglected. In order to take
those into account the most commonly used are
quadratic criteria, like the Tsai–Wu criterion [81],
which have the form:
Fijij+Fii=1
(i, j summed)
(1)
where Fij and Fi are strength parameters and i
and j are the components of the stress tensor.
However, combined stress tests are necessary to
completely identify all the parameters, and these
are not easy to perform. Moreover, quadratic
criteria tend to be purely empirical, their purpose
being to deﬁne a failure envelope by using a
minimum number of test data.
The availability of the parameters needed to
identify the criterion is an important issue when
dealing with composites under constant develop-
ment like those envisaged for fusion reactors. For
this reason the CEA has developed new resistance
criteria that, while being based on physical con-
siderations, can also be easily identiﬁed. These
new criteria are referred as TAURO design crite-
ria in this paper and are deﬁned as follows:
 To account for the different mechanical prop-
erties it is at ﬁrst proposed to separately con-
sider stresses in plane and stresses through the
thickness.
 Stresses through the thickness can then be eval-
uated assuming brittle elastic behavior:
zz
−zzzz
+
(2)
xz,yzmax
(3)
where zz
−and zz
+ are the normal-stress com-
pressive and tensile limits, respectively, and
max is the limit for shear stresses. For example,
the limits assumed for the TAURO blanket
(based on Cerasep® N3-1) are reported in Sec-
tion 2.2.2.
 The criterion used for plane stresses is a
quadratic criterion derived from the Von Mises
stress. The idea is to distinguish between tensile
and compressive behavior on the basis of the
spectral decomposition of the stress tensor. In
terms of the invariants of this tensor the Von
Mises criterion can be written as:
1
2{3Tr[o´o´]−Tr2[o´]}0
2
or
1
23Tro´o´
0
2n−Tr2 o´
0n1
(4)
where 0 is the maximum allowable stress
(which is the same for compressive and tensile
loading). We can then split the tensor o into its
positive and negative eigenvalues:
o´ =o´++o´−
o´+o´−=0
(5)
and modify inequality (4) as follows:
1
23Tro´+o´+
(0
+)2n+3Tro´−o´−
(0
−)2n−Tr2o´+
0
+n
−Tr2o´−
0
−n−2Tro´+
0
+nTro´−
0
−n1
(6)
or:1
+
0
+2
+2
+
0
+2
+1
−
0
−2
+2
−
0
−2
−1
+2
+
(0
+)2
−1
−2
−
(0
−)2 −1
+2
−
0
+0
−−1
−2
+
0
−0
+1
(7)
where 0
+ and 0
−are, respectively, the as-
sumed limits under tensile and compressive
loading.The only two parameters (0
+ and 0
−)
needed to identify this criterion can therefore
be obtained by means of classic tension/com-
pression tests. It must be stressed that the
above criteria have been theoretically derived
and their validation will require a large experi-
mental
campaign,
which
will
have
to
be
launched for the selected composites to be used
in fusion blankets. Moreover, the effects of
mechanical damage on the other composite
physical properties (thermal and electrical con-
ductivities, hermeticity, permeation rate, ero-
sion rate, resistance to neutron irradiation etc.)
are not yet known. In order to limit damage
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
88
Fig. 30. Comparison of the failure envelopes of the Von Mises and TAURO criteria.
effects within the composites the threshold of
matrix microcracking saturation (beginning of
ﬁber/matrix debonding) has been assumed as
the maximum allowable tensile stress in the
thermo-mechanical analyses of the TAURO
blanket (about 145 MPa measured on 2D
Cerasep® composites). The actual failure limit
(580 MPa) has been assumed instead as the
maximum allowable compressive stress since
no damage is observed under compression. The
resulting failure envelope is shown in Fig. 30
and compared with those obtained with the
Von Mises criterion assuming separately, 0
+
and 0
−as limits.
 It is clear that the conventional primary and
secondary stress limits do not apply for ceram-
ics and that the above TAURO design criteria
go a long way in providing more realistic stress
criteria for SiCf/SiC design application. In the
absence of tools enabling such sophisticated
analysis, it is suggested that, as a very rough
and conservative ﬁrst order approximation, de-
signers using conventional FEM analysis limit
the total combined stress in plane to about 190
MPa. However, stresses through the thickness
should be evaluated separately.
3.4. Lifetime
Lifetime is a very important parameter for fu-
sion power plant studies as it has a direct effect
on replacement costs and availability. However, it
is very difﬁcult to quantify and justify at this
point in time as the database for modern SiCf/SiC
composites is very limited. Many of the phenom-
ena that could affect the lifetime of SiCf/SiC
composites for a particular design have been iden-
tiﬁed in the previous sections and sub-sections. In
some cases quantiﬁcation of these phenomena has
been limited to less-than-optimized SiC mono-
liths, ﬁbers and composites. In other cases, these
phenomena have been observed but not clearly
understood from a mechanistic point of view.
Traditionally, the lifetime of structural compo-
nents depends strongly on temperature, stress,
chemical compatibility, thermal stability, radia-
tion stability, transmutation products and dimen-
sional
stability.
These
parameters
lead
to
time-dependent phenomena that determine failure
boundaries, and hence, design lifetimes. Of all the
phenomena identiﬁed in previous sections, two
stand out as potential life-limiting mechanisms:
compatibility with coolant (particularly Pb–17Li)
and the effects of He transmutations. With regard
to the compatibility issue, it is anticipated that
pure SiC is thermodynamically stable in pure
liquid Pb–17Li. However, oxide ceramics tend to
be less stable in Pb–17Li. Thus, the compatibility
of silicon-carbide matrix composites in Pb–17Li
will be highly dependent on the oxygen level and
the distribution within the material. The presence
of silica on the surface of the composite, or even
on the surface of the ﬁbers, could have a pro-
found effect on the compatibility. In general,
compatibility is ensured by limiting the coolant/
structure interface temperature and the exposure
time, as well as the impurities. Compatibility data
are essential to the establishment of both tempera-
ture limits and design lifetimes.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
89
The helium transmutation rates are very high in
silicon carbide composite blankets with a lead–
lithium coolant/breeder. The transmuted He can
have a signiﬁcant effect on swelling (dimensional
stability), hermeticity (coalescence of He bubbles
on grain boundaries and interfaces), mechanical
properties (weakening of joints and interfaces),
and thermal conductivity (added resistance to
heat ﬂow). In addition to expanding the current
programs studying the effects on implanted He, it
is essential to conduct neutron-irradiation studies
with concurrent He production in order to ad-
dress potential life-limiting phenomena associated
with He transmutation.
Other time-dependent phenomena that could
affect lifetime are radiation-enhanced creep (di-
mensional stability), thermal creep (dimensional
stability and failure) and thermal fatigue (failure).
Although data are available for older ﬁbers and
composites, it is essential that these phenomena
be quantiﬁed for the newer materials.
Given the state of the art of SiCf/SiC composite
development, it is premature to specify criteria for
design lifetime at this point. The R&D effort
should be developed in such a way that the begin-
ning-of-life performance (based on unirradiated
properties) satisﬁes design goals, that the early-in-
life (one week to one month) performance satisﬁes
design goals, and that the long term performance
is adequate for attractive fusion power plant
performance.
In the absence of ﬁrm guidelines, some studies
have assumed certain limits. For example, the
ARIES studies [7] have assumed a very rough
estimate of 3% burnup (1.5 atom% He). Certainly
this is an area where future R&D should be
directed. No speciﬁc value is proposed for design
studies at this time.
4. R&D plan
Although much has been accomplished through
the international R&D effort over this last decade
or so, a new impetus is required to push the R&D
further in light of the results obtained so far and
of the key issues identiﬁed through design studies
for
high
performance
SiCf/SiC-based
fusion
power core.
Material R&D effort is continuing internation-
ally and should be closely coordinated with the
design effort. Current efforts are focused both on
theoretical (modeling and analyses), experimental
and manufacturing aspects in order to achieve the
necessary SiCf/SiC improvement and to establish
its relevance for use as a structural material in
fusion power core components.
In the EU, theoretical activities include the
development
of
the
TAURO
Pb–17Li-based
blanket conceptual design with the double objec-
tive of: (i) improving behavioral modeling and
results interpretation; and (ii) supplying useful
guidelines for the material development and char-
acterization in order to relax some critical issues
concerning the manufacturing of complex shapes.
The development of a veriﬁcation methodology
for structural analysis is a mandatory action for
any reactor design study involving ceramic matrix
composites. Further activities will be carried out
in order to identify a more reﬁned model and a
resistance criterion; in particular a new microme-
chanical damage model could be investigated by
CEA in order to decrease the number of mechan-
ical tests required for the identiﬁcation of parame-
ters describing the behavior of the composite.
The improvement of both the thermal conduc-
tivity and the stability of the thermo-mechanical
properties during irradiation is a fundamental is-
sue for SiCf/SiC R&D: the continual progress in
ﬁber quality, which led to the fabrication of al-
most stoichiometric ﬁbers, indicates good pro-
gress towards reducing such a concern. However,
a large effort has to be conducted for improving
the matrix–ﬁber interface. Improvements of the
SiC matrix processing to reduce the differences in
performance with respect to the bulk CVD SiC
seem more challenging as an R&D pursuit. New
composites development is highlighted in the cur-
rent R&D program. SNECMA has recently pro-
posed a study for improvement of its composites
based on: (i) the decreasing of porosity from
10% to 4% by means of a new matrix sili-
conized grade reaction giving SiCf/SiC+Si com-
posite; and (ii) the use of Hi-Nicalon S ﬁbers with
a new interphase+CVI matrix. New composites
will be also manufactured by ENEA via polymer
inﬁltration and pyrolysis by using advanced poly-
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
90
mer and stoichiometric ﬁber 3D preforms and
performing the pyrolysis at higher temperatures in
order to provide an almost crystalline -SiC matrix.
The capability of producing large-scale half-ﬁnished
products and complex small mock-ups or large
prototypes is well documented by SNECMA.
A number of irradiation tests are being planned
internationally, as summarized in Table 9. For the
irradiationtestingscheduledattheHighFluxReactor
at Petten, NL, the SiCf/SiC composites will be
provided by the European Union, the United States
andJapanintheframeworkofanIEAcollaboration.
The main properties to be investigated will be the
bending strength and thermal diffusivity following
irradiations at 900 and 1300 K temperature levels
and up to a damage dose of 2.5 dpa. The possibility
of some in-pile conductivity monitoring will be
evaluated.
A study of the stability of SiCf/SiC composites
in Pb–17Li is ongoing. The new exposure campaign
will be carried out up to 6000 h in physico-chemical
conditions approaching those representative of the
TAURO blanket coolant (i.e. temperature of about
800 K, ﬂowing LiPb with 0.5–1 m/s velocity). After
exposure the samples will be characterized in order
to investigate thermal stability and the degradation
of thermo-mechanical properties.
In the US, the R&D plan has a primary goal of
understanding the scientiﬁc basis for the behavior
of SiCf/SiC composites and a secondary goal of
applying this understanding to improve the perfor-
manceofthesematerials. Examples ofthisapproach
are the following two tasks: (1) to develop a
fundamentalunderstandingoftheradiationdamage
in monolithic SiC and SiC ﬁbers with and without
gaseous transmutations, i.e. with and without He;
and (2) to improve the radiation stability in SiC
ﬁber/interphase/matrixstructures.Thefundamental
understanding will help identify the limits to these
materials and to assist in the selection of optimized
ﬁber/interphase/matrix combinations. The funda-
mental understanding will also underpin efforts to
modeltheradiationresponseofSiCf/SiCcomposites.
Fusionenergysystemswillrequirecomponentslarger
than the current size of SiCf/SiC composites that can
be fabricated. Therefore, the US program is also
focused on development of low activation, radiation
resistantjoiningmethodology.Thestartingpointfor
this effort is the joining methodology developed for
non-nuclear programs with the US fusion program
adapting these techniques to produce the desired
properties.Thermalconductivityisathirdtopicthat
the US program is currently investigating. There is
an effort to model radiation effects on the thermal
conductivity of these materials and to develop
engineering approaches to enhancing their thermal
con2ductivity. Two smaller research efforts include:
(1)demonstratingtechniquesforproductionoflarge
components; and (2) development of a database on
the high-temperature fracture strength, creep and
thermal conductivity.
Table 9
Summary of planned irradiation SiCf/SiC tests
Irradiation level
Reactor
SiC irradiation tests
Temperature
(°C)
(dpa)
10
HFIR
500, 800
12J and 14J (monolithic and composite: thermal conductivity, bend strength,
dimensional change ﬁber strain and creep)
600–1500
HFIR
Mapping Elevated Temperature Swelling (METS) capsules (single crystals and
1.5, 3.0
Morton CVD)
2.5
In planning stages. Will probably include composite thermal conductivity and
HFR
600–1000
ﬁber creep
ATR
2
Composite thermal conductivity
300
400–600
30
JOYO
Thermo-mechanical properties
JMTR
He effect through boron injection followed by irradiation
500–1000
1
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
91
The US R&D plan recognizes the importance
of collaboration with the EU and Japanese fusion
materials programs, of non-nuclear ceramic com-
posite programs to provide basic material devel-
opment and property input and of small business
innovative research efforts. The goal of the US
program is to address issues that are unique to
fusion and rely on other sources of information
for much of the ﬁber and composite development
and database.
In Japan, the theoretical activities include the
development of the DREAM and D-SSTR con-
ceptual designs under JAERI and a new activity
on He-cooled solid blanket design study as a part
of the next Japan–US collaboration program
from 2001 to 2007. The theory and modeling
work is also recognized to be a very important
part of the SiCf/SiC R&D for fusion applications.
The development of structural analysis method-
ology and establishment of design codes with
sufﬁcient and appropriate safety margin are espe-
cially important for the utilization of SiCf/SiC and
ceramic matrix composites and would be carried
out in collaboration by JAERI/NIFS and univer-
sities. The efforts to develop chemical and mi-
crostructural
analysis
methodologies
and
establishment of mechanical property evaluation
methodologies with the emphasis on small speci-
men test technology (SSTT) for irradiated materi-
als are important ongoing activities in universities
and NRIM. The R&D efforts to develop simula-
tion damage studies for 14-MeV neutrons utilizing
electrons, ions and ﬁssion neutrons have been
strengthened, together with the key technology
development for IFMIF.
The improvement of both the thermal conduc-
tivity and the stability of the thermo-mechanical
properties before and after irradiation has been an
important issue in the Japanese program, where
signiﬁcant ﬁber property improvements have been
accomplished and are still ongoing. These im-
provements include achieving near-stoichiometry
composition with higher crystallinity and explor-
ing effects of metallic element additions, in ﬁbers
such as Hi-Nicalon type-S, Tyranno-SA and oth-
ers. Efforts have also been underway for improv-
ing matrix–ﬁber interface and for improving the
SiC matrix in order to improve total performance
of SiCf/SiC composites. These efforts for fusion
application are based on non-fusion R&D activi-
ties in Japan, such as the AMG program, the
Sunshine project and others. CREST-ACE pro-
gram and the current Japan–USA collaborative
program, JUPITER, are the most active efforts in
trying to develop SiCf/SiC for fusion application.
Further development of composite fabrication
process is in progress including: (1) multiple-inter-
phase+CVI matrix, (2) PIP (polymer inﬁltration
and pyrolysis) using new polymers and their
blends, (3) RS (reaction sintering, or melt inﬁltra-
tion) using ﬁller powders, (4) HP (hot pressing),
and (5) a combined process of (1)–(4). These
process developments are in progress at Kyoto
University, Osaka Prefecture University, NRIM,
JAERI,
Tokyo
Institute
of
Technology
and
others.
Kyoto University/Ube has produced tubes and
cone shaped-components for hermeticity/vacuum
properties measurement (Hokkaido/Kyoto), tri-
tium inventory test (Kyushu/Kyoto), UNICEX
(unit cell experiment to be done by Kyoto/UCLA
as a part of the next Japan–USA collaboration
program, JUPITER-II) and others. This effort
has just started and will be continued extensively
for three to four years.
As an ISTC program, a very preliminary study
on in-reactor creep of SiCf/SiC is ongoing be-
tween Japan and the Russian Federation. The
new
Japan–US
collaborative
program,
JUPITER-II, will be initiated on April 1, 2001,
under
which
the
following
tasks
will
be
investigated:
Task 2: High-temperature gas-cooled blanket
 Sub-task 2-1: Pre-irradiation studies of key
materials system issues
– SiC hermetic joining, coatings, thermal
conductivity improvement, high tempera-
ture corrosion, and compatibility with Be/
breeders
– SiC
fabrication
R&D
and
materials
supply
– SiC materials system thermal–mechanical
interactions
 Sub-task 2-2: Irradiation testing of materials
systems
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
92
– SiC capsule irradiations
As part of the domestic programs, fast neutron
irradiation in JOYO and mixed-spectrum neutron
irradiation in JMTR are in progress. The main
properties to be investigated will be the bending
strength, thermal diffusivity, tensile strength, fa-
tigue properties, and creep properties following an
irradiation at a temperature of up to 1300K and a
damage dose of up to 5 dpa. The possibility of
some in-pile conductivity monitoring will be eval-
uated. A new high resolution HVEM+ion accel-
erator at CARET, Hokkaido University, will
provide in-situ observation results of radiation
damage in SiCf/SiC composites. A new multiple
beam irradiation test facility at Kyoto University
(DuET Facility) will provide data from 4 to 1600
K (in vacuum and in gaseous environments) un-
der precisely controlled conditions for systematic
and accurate experiments for establishing radia-
tion damage process integration.
Studies of the stability of SiCf/SiC composites
in Pb–17Li, Li and Flibe are ongoing. This activ-
ity will be expanded as a part of the upcoming
JUPITER-II program under the collaboration
with INEEL.
5. Conclusions
The use of SiCf/SiC composite as a structural
material in fusion reactors is attractive based on
its low induced radioactivity and afterheat. It has
been considered in several power plant studies,
most recently in the TAURO, DREAM, and
ARIES-AT design studies. From these studies,
several issues have been identiﬁed for the SiCf/SiC
material. These include the cost of fabrication, the
joining methods, and the factors limiting the
range of operation and performance, in particular
the rather low thermal conductivity at high tem-
perature and under irradiation, and the maximum
allowable
operating
temperature
(based
on
strength degradation and/or compatibility). These
have identiﬁed the progress required in developing
the new generation SiCf/SiC in order to make it
an attractive high performance fusion power core
material with safety advantages.
Based on the available results and a reasonable
extrapolation in improving SiCf/SiC, in particular
the goal of achieving stoichiometry (minimizing
impurities), the SiCf/SiC parameters and proper-
ties shown in Table 5 are recommended for
present design analysis of SiC/SiC-based power
plant for the long term (20–30 years in the future,
or more). This is in agreement with the suggestion
emerging from the last International Town Meet-
ing on SiC/SiC Design and Material Issues for
Fusion Systems [26].
Acknowledgements
This paper resulted in great part from very
informative
discussions
at
the
‘International
Town Meeting on SiC/SiC Design and Material
Issues for Fusion Systems’, which was held at Oak
Ridge National Laboratory on January 18–19,
2000 [26]. The meeting was very successful in
achieving its main objective of bringing together
the SiC/SiC design and material communities
from Japan, the EU and the US to exchange
information, identify the design-related critical is-
sues, discuss them in the light of the latest mate-
rial R&D results, and provide guidelines to help
focus future effort. The authors gladly acknowl-
edge
the
contributions
of
all
the
meeting
participants.
References
[1] F. Najmabadi, R. Conn et al., The ARIES-I tokamak
reactor study, Final Report, UCLA-PPG-1323, UCLA,
CA, 1991.
[2] F. Najmabadi, R.W. Conn, The Aries Team, The ARIES-
II and ARIES-IV second-stability tokamak reactors, Pro-
ceedings TMTFE-10, La Grange Park, IL, USA, June,
1992.
[3] L.M. Waganer, Innovation Leads the Way to Attractive
IFE Reactors-Prometheus-L & Prometheus-H, IAEA
Technical Committee Meeting and Workshop on Fusion
Reactor Design and Technology, 13–17 September, 1993.
[4] H. Golﬁer et al., Progress on the TAURO blanket system,
Proceedings SOFT-21, 2000.
[5] L. Boccaccini et al., Advanced helium cooled pebble bed
blanket, Task PPA2.6, Final Report, Forschungszentrum,
Karlsruhe, Germany, FZKA 6402, June, 2000.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
93
[6] S. Nishio, S. Ueda, I. Aoki, R. Kurihara, et al., Improved
tokamak concept focusing on easy maintenance, Fusion
Engng Des. 41 (1998) 357–364.
[7] A.R. Raffray, L. El-Guebaly, S. Gordeev, S. Malang, E.
Mogahed, F. Najmabadi, I. Sviatoslavsky, D.K. Sze,
M.S. Tillack, X. Wang, The ARIES Team, High perfor-
mance blanket for ARIES-AT power plant, in Proc. 21st
Symposium on Fusion Technology, Madrid, Spain, Sep-
tember, 2000, in press.
[8] L. Giancarli, J.P. Bonal, A. Caso, G. Le Marois, N.B.
Morley, J.F. Salavy, Design requirements for SiC/SiC
composites structural material in fusion power reactor
blanket, Fusion Engng Des. 41 (1998) 165–171.
[9] L. Giancarli, G. Aiello, A. Caso, A. Gasse, et al., R&D
Issues for SiCf/SiC composites structural material in fu-
sion power reactor blankets, Fusion Engng Des. 48 (2000)
509–520.
[10] B. Riccardi, P. Fenici, A. Frias Rebelo, L. Giancarli, G.
Le Marois, E. Philippe, Status of the European R&D
activities on SiCf/SiC composites for fusion reactors, Fu-
sion Engng Des. 51–52 (2000) 11–22.
[11] I. Cook, Fusion Engng Des. 25 (1994) 179.
[12] G. Aiello et al., SiCf/SiC composites for structural appli-
cations in fusion power reactors: the TAURO blanket, in
Proc. 12th International Conference on Composite Mate-
rials (ICCM-12), Paris, 5–9 July, 1999.
[13] G. Aiello, L. Giancarli, H. Golﬁer, J.-F. Maire, Modeling
of mechanical behavior and design criteria for SiCf/SiC
composite structures in fusion reactors, Fusion Engng
Des., in press.
[14] G. Aiello, H. Golﬁer, J.-F. Maire, Y. Poitevin, J.-F.
Salavy, Modeling of SiCf/SiC composite structures for
nuclear components, Fusion Engng Des. 51–52 (2000)
73–79.
[15] H. Golﬁer, G. Aiello, M.A. Fu¨tterer, A. Gasse, et al.,
Performances of TAURO blanket system associated with
a liquid-metal cooled divertor, Fusion Engng Des. 49–50
(2000) 559–565.
[16] S. Malang, H. Schnauder, M.S. Tillack, Combination of a
self-cooled liquid-metal blanket with a gas turbine power
conversion system, Fusion Engng Des. 41 (1998) 561–
567.
[17] S. Nishio, S. Ueda, I. Aoki, R. Kurihara et al., Mainte-
nance oriented tokamak reactor with low activation mate-
rial, Fusion Energy 1996, in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. on
Fusion Energy, vol. 3, International Atomic Energy
Agency, Vienna, 1997, p. 693.
[18] S. Nishio, S. Ueda, R. Kurihara, T. Kuroda, et al.,
Prototype tokamak fusion power reactor based on SiC/
SiC composite material focusing on easy maintenance,
Fusion Engng Des. 48 (2000) 271–279.
[19] Y. Murakami, H. Takase, K. Shinya, S. Nishio, et al.,
Power plant design study of a high aspect ratio tokamak
using a SiC composite structure, Fusion Engng Des. 41
(1998) 501–509.
[20] Y. Murakami, M. Sugihara, Optimization of steady-state
and hybrid operation in a tokamak fusion reactor by
using divertor scaling models, Fusion Technol. 24 (1993)
375.
[21] J. Bohdanski, Important sputtering yield data for toka-
maks: a comparison of measurements and estimates, J.
Nucl. Mater. 93&94 (1980) 44.
[22] M. Matsunami, et al., Energy dependence of ion-induced
sputtering yield of monoatomic solids in the low energy
region, IPPJ-AM-52, 1987.
[23] D.L. Smith, J.N. Brooks, A physical sputtering code for
fusion applications, in Proc. 9th Symp. on the engineering
problems of fusion research, IEEE Pub. No. 81CH1715-2,
1981, p. 719.
[24] A.R. Raffray, L. El-Guebaly, S. Malang, I. Sviatoslavsky,
M.S. Tillack, X. Wang, and The ARIES Team, ARIES-
AT blanket and divertor, Fusion Technology 39 (2001)
429–433.
[25] R. Schleicher, A.R. Raffray, C.P. Wong, An assessment
of the Brayton cycle for high performance power plant,
Fusion Technology 39 (2001) 823–827.
[26] International Town Meeting on SiC/SiC Design and Ma-
terial Issues for Fusion Systems, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, January 18–19, 2000, http://aries.ucsd.edu/
PUBLIC/SiCSiC.
[27] D.A. Petti, L.A. El-Guebaly, et al., and the ARIES Team,
Safety and environment assessment of ARIES-AT, Fu-
sion Technology 39 (2001) 449–457.
[28] R.L. Miller, and The ARIES Team, Systems context of
the ARIES-AT conceptual fusion power plant, Fusion
Technology 39 (2001) 439–443.
[29] E. Mogahed, L. El-Guebaly, A. Abdou, P. Wilson, D.
Henderson, and the ARIES Team, Loss of coolant and
loss of ﬂow accident analyses for ARIES-AT power plant,
Fusion Technology 39 (2001) 462–466.
[30] A. Kohyama, Y. Katoh, T. Hinoki, W. Zhang, M. Ko-
tani, in Proc. 8th European Conference on Composite
Materials, vol. 4, 1998, pp.15–22.
[31] M. Singh, Microstructure and mechanical properties of
reaction-formed joints in reaction-bonded silicon carbide
ceramics, J. Mater. Sci. 33 (1998) 1–7.
[32] T. Ishikawa, S. Kajii, T. Hisayuki, High heat-resistant
SiC-polycrystalline ﬁber and its ﬁber-bonded ceramic,
presented at the American Ceramic Society 24th Annual
Cocoa Beach Conference & Exposition: An International
Conference on Engineering Ceramics and Structures, Co-
coa Beach, FL, January 23–28, 2000.
[33] L.V. Interrante, C.W. Whitmarsh, W. Sherwood, H.-J.
Wu, R. Lewis, G.E. Maciel, in Mats. Res. Soc. Sympos.
Proc., Proceedings of the Symposium on Better Ceramics
Through Chemistry IV, vol. 346, 1994, pp. 593–603.
[34] P. Lemoine, M. Ferraris, M. Salvo, M. Appendino Mon-
torsi, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 16 (1996) 1231–1236.
[35] M. Ferraris, M. Salvo, C. Isola, M. Appendino Montorsi,
A. Kohyama, J. Nucl. Mater. 258–263 (1998) 1546–1550.
[36] A. Gasse, G. Aiello, L. Giancarli, G. Le Marois, J.-F.
Salavy, J. Szczepanski, Progress on SiCf/SiC structures
joining techniques and modelling for design analyses,
Proc. SOFT-20, (1998). See also, A.Gasse et al., Speciﬁc
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
94
non reactive BraSiC alloys for SiC/SiC joining, Report
CEA-Grenoble, DEM no. DR 25/97, December, 1997.
[37] R.H. Jones, D. Steiner, G.A. Newsome, H.M. Kerch,
Radiation resistant ceramic matrix composites, J. Nucl.
Mater. 245 (1997) 87.
[38] L.L. Snead, R.H. Jones, A. Kohyama, P. Fenici, Status of
silicon carbide composites for fusion, J. Nucl. Mater.
233–237 (1996) 26.
[39] P. Fenici, A.J. Frias Rebolo, R.H. Jones, A. Kohyama,
L.L. Snead, Current status of SiC/SiC composites R&D,
J. Nucl. Mater. 258–263 (1998) 215.
[40] G.E. Youngblood, R.H. Jones, G.N. Morscher, Akira
Kohyama, Creep behavior for advanced polycrystalline
SiC ﬁbers, in Fusion Materials Semi-annual Progress
Report for Period Ending December 31, DOE/ER-0313/
21, 1996, p. 89.
[41] G.N. Morscher, J.A. DiCarlo, Creep and stress relaxation
properties in relation to microstructures for SiC ﬁbers,
HITEMP Review, vol. III, NASA CP19117, October
25–27, 1993.
[42] J.A. DiCarlo, H.M. Yun, Microstructural factors affect-
ing creep-rupture failure of ceramic ﬁbers and composites,
Ceram. Trans. 99 (1998) 119.
[43] C.H. Henager Jr, R.H. Jones, High-temperature plasticity
effects in bridged cracks and sub-critical crack growth in
ceramic composites, Mater. Sci. Engng A 166 (1993) 211.
[44] C.H. Henager Jr, R.H. Jones, Subcritical crack growth in
CVI silicon carbide reinforced with Nicalon ﬁbers: experi-
ment and model, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 77 (1994) 2381.
[45] R.H. Jones, C.H. Henager Jr, Fusion Reactor Materials
Semiannual Progress Report for period ending March 31,
DOE/ER-0313/14, 1993, p. 451.
[46] J.W. Holmes, Inﬂuence of stress ratio on the elevated-
temperature fatigue of a silicon carbide ﬁber-reinforced
silicon nitride composite, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 74 (1991)
1639.
[47] N. Chawla, Y. Tur, J.W. Holmes, J.R. Barber, High-fre-
quency fatigue behavior of woven-ﬁber-fabric-reinforced
polymer-derived ceramic matrix composites, J. Am. Ce-
ram. Soc. 81 (1998) 1221.
[48] S. Zhu, M. Mizuno, Y. Kagawa, J. Cao, Y. Nagano, H.
Kaya, Creep and fatigue behavior in Hi-Nicalon ﬁber-re-
inforced silicon carbide composites at high temperatures,
J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 82 (1999) 117.
[49] A.J. Eckel, J.Z. Gyekenyesi, T.P. Halso, E.R. Generazio,
Thermal stock of ﬁber reinforced ceramic matrix com-
posites, NASA TM-103777, 1991.
[50] H. Wang, R. Singh, Ceramic Engineering and Science
Proc., Cocoa Beach meeting, 1994.
[51] H.W. Scholz, PhD Thesis, University of Karlsruhe, Ger-
many, Report EUR 17681 DE, 1997.
[52] R.J. Price, Neutron irradiation-induced voids in beta-sili-
con carbide, J. Nucl. Mater. 48 (1973) 47.
[53] G.W. Hollenberg, C.H. Henager Jr, G.E. Youngblood,
D.J. Trimble, S.A. Simonson, G.A. Newsome, E. Lewis,
The effect of irradiation on the stability and properties of
monolithic silicon carbide and SiCf/SiC composites up to
25 dpa, J. Nucl. Mater. 219 (1995) 70.
[54] G.E. Youngblood, R.H. Jones, A. Kohyama, L.L. Snead,
Radiation response of SiC-based ﬁbers, J. Nucl. Mater.
258–263 (1998) 1551–1556.
[55] D.J. Senor, G.E. Youngblood, C.E. Moore, D. Trimble,
G.A. Newsome, J.J. Woods, Effects of neutron irradia-
tion on thermal conductivity of SiC-based composites and
monolithic ceramics, Fusion Technol. 30 (3) (1996) 943–
955.
[56] G.E. Youngblood, D.J. Senor, R.H. Jones, S. Graham,
The thermal conductivity of 2D SiCf/SiC composites, J.
Nucl. Mater., in press.
[57] G.E. Youngblood, C.H. Henager, Jr, R.H. Jones, Effects
of neutron irradiation on the strength of continuous
ﬁber-reinforced SiC/SiC composites, in Fusion Materials
Semiannual Progress Report for Period Ending December
31, DOE/ER-0313/21, 1996, p. 117.
[58] L.L. Snead, private communication.
[59] R.J. Price, Properties of silicon carbide for nuclear fuel
particle coatings, Nucl. Technol. 35 (1977) 320.
[60] R. Scholz, Light ion irradiation creep of SiC ﬁbers in
torsion, J. Nucl. Mater. 258–263 (1998) 1533.
[61] R. Scholz, G.E. Youngblood, Irradiation creep of ad-
vanced silicon carbide ﬁbers, J. Nucl. Mater. 283–287
(2001) 372–375.
[62] K. Sasaki, T. Yano, T. Maruyama, T. Iseki, Helium
release and microstructure of neutron-irradiated SiC ce-
ramics, J. Nucl. Mater. 179–181 (1991) 407.
[63] T. Noda, H. Araki, S. Ito, M. Fujita, K. Maki, in Proc.
of 2nd IEA/JUPITER Joint International Workshop on
SiC/SiC Ceramic Composites for Fusion Applications,
Sendai, October, 1997, p. 121.
[64] Y. Katoh, T. Hinoki, A. Kohyama, T. Shibayama, H.
Takahashi, L.L. Snead, S.J. Zinkle, in Proc. 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Fusion Reactor Materials, Colorado
Springs, October, 1999.
[65] S. Nogami, A. Hasegawa, K. Abe, T. Taguchi, R. Ya-
mada, in Proc. 9th International Conference on Fusion
Reactor Materials, Colorado Springs, October, 1999.
[66] A. Hasegawa, S. Nogami, K. Abe, B.M. Oliver, R.H.
Jones, in Proc. 9th International Conference on Fusion
Reactor Materials, Colorado Springs, October, 1999.
[67] P. Jung, J. Nucl. Mater. 191–194 (1992) 377–381.
[68] A.J. Frias Rebelo, H.W. Scholz, H. Kolbe, G.P. Tar-
taglia, P. Fenici, J. Nucl. Mater. 258–263 (1998) 1582–
1588.
[69] A. Hasegawa, M. Saito, K. Abe, R.H. Jones, J. Nucl.
Mater. 253 (1998) 31–35.
[70] H.W. Scholz, A.J. Frias Rebelo, D.G. Rickerby, P.
Krogul, W.E. Lee, J.H. Evans, P. Fenici, J. Nucl. Mater.
258–263 (1998) 1572–1576.
[71] A. Hasegawa, M. Saito, S. Nogami, K. Abe, R.H. Jones,
H. Takahashi, J. Nucl. Mater. 264 (1999) 355.
[72] P. Fenici, R. Scholz, Advanced low-activation materials.
Fibre-reinforced ceramic composites, J. Nucl. Mater.
212–215 (1994) 60–68.
[73] A. LaBarbera, B. Riccardi, A. Donato, A. Orsini, L.
Moreschi, F.S. Alvi, S. Casadio, G. Filacchioni, A.
A.R. Raffray et al. / Fusion Engineering and Design 55 (2001) 55–95
95
Masci, C.A. Nannetti, F. Padella, Compatibility of SiC/
SiC ﬁbre composite with lithium silicate and lithium
titanate in fusion relevant conditions, in: R. Beaumont, P.
Libeure, B. de Gentile, G. Tonon (Eds.), Fusion Technol-
ogy, 20th SOFT Marseille, 1998.
[74] M. Dalle Donne, European DEMO BOT Solid Breeder
Blanket, KfK 5429, November, 1994.
[75] A. Caso, P. Huet, P.C. Tramier, A new SiC/SiC com-
posite as low activation structural material, in Proc. SiC/
SiC composites workshop JRC/Ispra (I), October 28–29,
1996.
[76] H. Kleykamp, Chemical reactivity of SiC ﬁbre reinforced
SiC with beryllium and lithium ceramic breeder materials,
in Proc. 9th International Conference on Fusion Reactor
Materials, Colorado Springs, October, 1999.
[77] X. Aubard, J. Lamon, O. Allix, Model of the nonlinear
mechanical behavior of 2D SiC–SiC chemical vapour
inﬁltration composites, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 77 (8) (1994).
[78] P. Lade`veze, A. Gasser, O. Allix, Damage mechanisms
modeling for ceramic composites, J. Engng Mater. Tech-
nol. (1994) 116.
[79] S.W. Tsai, A survey of macroscopic failure criteria for
composite materials, J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. (1983) 2.
[80] P.D. Soden, M.J. Hinton, A.S. Kaddour, A comparison
of the predictive capabilities of current failure theories for
composite laminates, Compos. Sci. Technol. (1998) 58.
[81] S.W. Tsai, E.M. Wu, A general theory of strength for
anisotropic materials. J. Compos. Mater. (1971) 5.
.
